Science

Grade 10

Ministry of Education
Curriculum Development Centre
Sanothimi, Bhaktapur
Nepal
2017


Science

Grade 10

Authors
Kishor Nepal
Mahendra Bam
Rabina Maharjan

Government of Nepal
Ministry of Education
Curriculum Development Centre


Publisher: Government of Nepal
Ministry of Education
Curriculum Development Centre
Sanothimi, Bhaktapur

© Publisher

First Edition: 2017

Price Rs: 97

 

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system or transmitted, in any other form or by any means for
commercial purpose without the prior permission in writing of the Curriculum
Development Centre.

 

 

 


PREFACE

The curriculum and curricular materials have been developed and revised on
a regular basis with the aim of making the education objective-oriented,
practical, relevant and job oriented. It is necessary to instill the feelings of
nationalism, national integrity and democratic spirit in the students and equip
them with morality, discipline and self reliance, creativity and
thoughtfulness. It is essential to develop in them the linguistic and
mathematical skills, knowledge of science, information and communication
technology, environment, health and population and life skills. It is also
ni ry to bring in them the feeling of preserving and promoting arts and
aesthetics, humanistic norms, values and ideals. It has become the need of
the present time to make the students aware of respect for ethnicity, gender,
disabilities, languages, religion, cultures, regional diversity, human rights
and social values so as to make them capable of playing the role of
responsible citizens. This textbook has been developed in line with the
Secondary Level Science Curriculum, 2071 by incorporating the
recommendations of various education commissions and the feedback
obtained from various schools, workshops, seminars and interaction
programs attended by the teachers, students and parents.

 

 

   

  

In bringing out the textbook in this form, the contribution of the
Executive Director of the Curriculum Development Centre (CDC) Krishna
Prasad Kapri, Dr. Hridhaya Ratna Bajracharya, Umanath Lamsal, Baburam
Gautam, Pramila Bakhati, Puspa Raj Dhakal, Devraj Gurung, Keshar Khulal,
Manumaya Bhattrai. The content of the book was edited by Yubraj Adhikari.
Language of the book was edited by Ramesh Prasa Ghimire. The layout and
artworks of the book were done by Jayaram Kuikel. CDC extends sincere
thanks to all those who have contributed in developing this textbook.

This textbook contains a variety of learning materials and exercises which
will help learners to achieve the competency and learning outcomes set in
the curriculum. Each unit contains various interesting activities and the
content required for meaningful learner engagement and interaction. There is
uniformity in the presentation of the activities which will certainly make it
convenient for the students. The teachers, students and other stakeholders are
expected to make constructive comments and suggestions to make it a more
useful learning material.

Government of Nepal
Ministry of Education
Curriculum Development Centre


Unit
Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 3
Unit 4
Unit 5
Unit 6
Unit 7
Unit 8
Unit 9
Unit 10
Unit 11
Unit 12
Unit 13
Unit 14
Unit 15
Unit 16
Unit 17
Unit 18 (A)
Unit 18(B)
Unit 19
Unit 20
Unit 21
Unit 22
Unit 23

Content

Force

Pressure

Energy

Heat

Light

Current Electricity and Magnetism
Classification of Elements

Chemical Reaction

Acid, Base and Salt

Some Gases

Metals

Hydrocarbon and its Compounds
Materials Used in Daily Life
Invertebrates

Human Nervous and Glandular Systems
Blood Circulation in Human Body
Chromosome and Sex Determination
Asexual and Sexual Reproduction
Artificial Vegetative Propagation in Plants
Heredity

Environmental Pollution and Management
History of the Earth

Climate Change and Atmosphere

The Earth in the Universe

Page Number
1
19
33
44
57
73
89
103
114
125
136
145
158
175
185
196
209
215
225
230
243
251
260
271


cna Force

We are familiar with several interesting facts related to our daily life like:
when an object is allowed to fall freely from certain height, it is always
attracted toward the surface of the earth. Similarly, a stone thrown sideways
moves in the curve path and ultimately falls towards the earth’s surface.
Likewise, in the solar system, the moon revolves around the Earth and the
Earth revolves round the sun in their orbits. It seems simple to us. But we
can’t analyze it in all the cases. To get the answer of such questions discuss in
group and go through the following topics.

Gravitation

Before sixteenth century, it was believed that the earth was at the centre of the
universe around which planets and the sun revolve round it. This model was
assumed as geocentric model. Onward, Nicholas Copernicus introduced a
heliocentric model which assumed that the sun lies at the centre and all the
planets revolve round it in their fixed orbit. In seventeenth century, observing
through a telescope, Galileo found that there were four satellites revolving
round the Jupiter. Hence, Newton tried to find out the reason why these
planets revolve round the sun and he began to investigate on it. During this
observation he propounded the famous law of gravitation in 1687 A.D. by
which the force of gravitation between two

bodies could be measured. *

According to Newton, the bodies in the universe
attract each another. This force of attraction is
called force of gravitation. For example, the Moon»
earth attracts the moon and the moon attracts the
earth too. Similarly, the earth attracts the Jupiter
and the Jupiter attracts the Earth.

The effect of force of attraction of a big body on Moon ott

a small body can be observed but that of a small

body on a big one cannot be observed. The sun is so large that even the sum
of the masses of all its planets and the satellites is only about 0.0015" part of
mass of the sun. Due to the gravitational force between the sun and the earth,
the earth keeps on moving around the sun. Similarly, the gravitational force
between the satellites and planet makes the satellites to revolve round the
planets. Thus, the gravitational force is responsible for the existence of the
solar system.

  

Science- 10 1


The effect of gravitation can be experienced more on liquid than solid. Hence,
we see tides in the sea and ocean due to the force of gravitation of the moon
and the sun on the earth when they lie on the same straight line.

Newton's Universal Law of Gravitation

There is a force of attraction between everybody in the universe. That force is
called force of gravitation. Newton's law of gravitation states that "The force
of gravitation between any two bodies is directly proportional to the product
of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance
between their centers."

Let us consider, two bodies A and B having masses m; and mp respectively
are separated by a distance 'd'. If the force of attraction between them is F,
then according to the law of gravitation,

 

 

 

Fam, *m.. ...(i) (when d is kept constant)

Pas cece (ii) (When m) and om me
mp are kept constant) 6 Ge)
Combining relations (i) and (ii), we get,

Fa mm ‘<< d——___>!

RE eceesstteeeee (ii) [where G is known as the universal
gravitational constant and its value is 6.67 x 10°'! Nm’kg?.]

   

In this case, G is defined as the force of gravitation which exists between two
bodies of unit masses separated by a unit distance. Its value remains the same
throughout the universe and is independent of the nature and size of the
bodies as well as the medium between them. Since the law of gravitation can
be applied to each and every objects in the universe irrespective of their
masses, sizes, medium and the distance between them, it is also known as the
universal law of gravitation.

To know the relation among the force of gravitation, mass and distance in
various circumstances, let’s study the following conditions.

1. When mass is changed keeping the distance between them constant

a. If the mass of one of the bodies is doubled, keeping their distance
same.

Let the mass of body A be m; and that of B be mp and the distance
between their centres be d. Then the force of gravitation is given by

Science- 10 2


Gmyma

   

F nat (i)
When one of the masses is doubled i.c mz
is doubled (2m) keeping the distance F
constant, then
t -
Fi= ome ——)

 

Fie
Hence, if the mass of one of the bodies is doubled, the force of
gravitation is also doubled.

b. If the mass of the both bodies is doubled, keeping their distance
same.

.. [From relation (i) ]

The force of gravitation between two bodies is given by

 

 

Gmym;
p= Same
When masses of both bodies A and B are
doubled, their masses become 2m; and F
2m, then + +

p= S2m2m, ¢—_———_ 1d ——___>

i a
P= 4m

F,=_ 4F [From relation (i)]

Hence, if the masses of both bodies are doubled keeping their distance
constant, the force of gravitation becomes four times the original force of
attraction.

It is verified from the examples that the force of attraction between two
bodies changes according to the product of their masses. So, the force of
gravitation between two bodies is directly proportional to the product of
their masses.

iLe., F am; x m;

@

 

Science- 10 3


2. When the distance between their centres is changed keeping
their masses constant.

a. If the distance between their centres is halved, keeping their
masses same.

Let the mass of A be ‘mj,’ and that of B be ‘m’ and the distance between
their centres be ‘d’. Then, the force of gravitation is given by

— de — >

Keeping the masses constant, if their
distance between their centres is made half, i.e d/2

 

 

mms
&
i
r= Cy
2 Fis 4*F [From (i)]
Hence, if the distance between the centre of two bodies is made half

keeping their masses constant, the force of gravitation becomes four
times than the initial force.

Fi=

b. If the distance between their centre is made double, keeping the
masses same.

Let the mass of A be ‘mj,’ and that of B be ‘m,’ and the distance between
their centres be d. Then, the force of gravitation is given by

i)
Gy +G@)

Keeping the masses constant, if the distance between their centre is made
double i.e 2d.

Fe Smme
a?

 

= Amy mMz
Fe Cone

F= G™mm™

4d?

Fi= :xF

Science- 10 4


Hence, if the distance between the centres of two bodies is made double
keeping their masses constant, the force of gravitation becomes one forth of
the initial force.

It is clear from the above relation that the force of attraction between two
bodies changes as the distance between two bodies varies. So, the force of
gravitation between two bodies is inversely proportional to square of the
distance between their centres.
1
Le, Fo
Example 1

Calculate the force of gravitation between two bodies having masses 10kg
and 20kg which are kept 200cm apart.

Given
Mass of first body (m,) = 10 kg
Mass of second body (mz) = 20 kg
Distance between them (d) = 200 cm = 2m
Gravitational constant (G) = 6.67x10""' Nm’/kg?
Force of gravitation (F) =?
According to the formula,
Gyms
2
_ 6.67 x1071x10 x 20
= Ser so W10 x20

F=

_ 667 x10"°x 2
4

= 3.335 x 10°N
Hence, the force of gravitation between them is 3.335 x 10° N.
Example 2

The mass of the earth is 6 x 10% kg and its radius is 6380 km. Calculate
the gravitational force produced between the earth and an object of mass
200kg kept on the surface the earth.

Given, Mass of the earth (M) = 6 x 10" kg
Mass of the object (m) = 200 kg
Radius of the earth (R)= d = 6380 km = 6380 x 10°m = 6.38 x 105m

Science- 10 5


 

Force of attraction ( F) = ?
Do you know?
According to the formula, |

The force of gravity 100km
(60miles) above the Earth is
just 3% less than that on the

palm _ 667 x10"#% 6 x10%% 200 Earth’s surface.

 

 

 

 

R (6.38 x108)
_ 6.67 x 6 x 200 x1024~ 1
6.38 x 6.38 x108+ 6
_ 8004x1089
40.70 x10%2

= 196.6 x 10N
= 1966N
So, the gravitational force produced between them is 1966N.
Gravity

We all know that the earth seems to be spherical
in shape. It may be surprising to think how
people can stay on such spherical shaped earth. A
person living in Nepal will have his head faced
toward the sky while standing on the around
whereas a person standing in the USA, just
opposite to Nepal, will too have his head faced
toward the sky while doing so. The reason
behind it is that the earth pulls both of them o& fig. 14
towards its center with a force known as the force of gravity of the earth.
Even while we walk, run, jump and stand, the force of attraction of the earth
affects us. This force also affects on the construction of house, road, bridge,
etc,

Gravity of the earth is the force of attraction of the earth on the objects within
its gravitational field. Thus, the force by which a planet /heavenly body pulls
every object towards its centre is called its gravity.

 

All planets and satellites have their own gravity but the magnitude of force of
gravity depends upon mass and radius. It increases with increase in the mass
of the body. Also it decreases with increase in radius of the body. For
example, mass of Jupiter is 319 times more than that of the earth but its
gravity does not increase highly in comparison to its mass. Its gravity is
reduced by radius. Thus, the gravity of the Jupiter is only 2.5 times than that

Science- 10 6


of the earth, Since weight is the force of gravity experienced by an object, it
can be calculated on the basis of Newton's Universal law of gravitation.

The force of gravity of a planet acting on a body is the weight of that object
on that planet.

 

Gravity, F = (W) = SF = wy We mg = m xt = Sa

 

where, W = gravity, M = mass of the planet,
m = mass of the object, R = radius of the | ® =x
planet and G = gravitational constant

 

 

 

 

Here, the radius of the planet is taken as the approximate distance between the
planet and the object because the object lies on its surface.

All planets and heavenly bodies have their own gravity. The body having
more mass has more gravity. Thus, the earth has more gravity than the moon.
The gravity of a heavenly body acting on a body with more mass (is more)
than that on a body with less mass (wam keeping g constant). Therefore, it is
difficult to lift a larger stone than a smaller stone. It is observed that, the
gravity of the moon is only 1/6 of the earth. Thus, any object weighing 600N
on the earth only weighs 100N on the surface of the moon.

Example 3

The mass of the earth is 6 x 10° kg and its radius is 6380 km. How much
force of gravity of earth acts on 1 kg object?

Given,
Mass of the earth (M) = 6 x 10% kg

Radius of earth (R) = 6380 km = 6.38 x 10°m
Mass of the object (m) =1 kg

Force of gravity (F) = W =?

According to the formula,

 

a 5 > GMm 6.67 x10711x 6 x10?#x 1
Gravity (P= “pe = esexaoy
40.02 x1013
= A002 x10" =9.8N
40.70 x10

Hence, the force of gravity of the earth on Ikg object is 9.8N.

Science- 10 7


Example 4
‘The radius of the moon is 1.7x10° m and its mass is 7.2 x 10” kg. How
much force of gravity of moon acts on 1kg mass on its surface?

Given,

Mass of the moon (M) = 7.2 x 107 kg

Radius of the moon (R) = 1.7*10°m

Mass of the object (m) = 1 kg

Force of gravity (F) = W =?

According to the formula,

_ GMm _ 667 x107"x 7.2 x10?#x 1
Gravity (F)= “a = aaa

48.02 x 1012
= Geoxio® ~ 1L.67N

It is clear from above two examples that the weight of a body of 1 kg is 9.8 N
on the earth while it is 1.67 N on surface of the moon. From this, it is clear
that weight of any object is six times more on the earth than that on the moon.

Let's think about the largest planet Jupiter. Its mass is about 319 times more
than that of the earth but its gravity is 2+ times only. The weight of an object

on the Jupiter also is 2; times than that on the earth. The gravity of the Jupiter

does not increase highly even its mass is about 319 times and radius is 11
times more than that of the earth.

Acceleration due to gravity

It is studied in junior classes that acceleration is developed on a moving body
when external force is applied in the direction of motion. Likewise,
acceleration is developed on every falling object due to gravity.

‘The acceleration produced in a freely falling body due to the force of gravity
of a planet is called acceleration due to gravity.

It is denoted by symbol 'g' and its SI unit is meter / second? (m/s’). The
acceleration due to gravity of all freely falling objects will be the same. In this
context, an Italian scientist Galileo conducted an experiment in 1590 A.D. As
Galileo dropped small and large objects simultaneously from the top of the
leaning tower of Pisa, both the objects reached the ground at the same time.
This proved that both the objects attained equal magnitude of acceleration due
to gravity.

Science- 10 8


Activity 1.1
Take two stones with different size but having about equal density. Drop both
of them from a height at the same time. Place a metal or a tin plate on the
surface where the stones strike. Listen carefully to the sound produced when
stones strike on the plate.

Again, make a ball out of a paper sheet. Take another unfolded paper sheet.
Drop both of them at the same time. And discuss on following questions.

1, Will the small and large stones hit the ground at the same time?
Why?

2. Will both sheets of paper, one made into a ball and another unfolded,
reach the ground at the same time?

3. What conclusion can be drawn from it?
Feather and Coin experiment

Take about a 1m long glass tube as shown in the figure. Put a coin and a
feather at one end and close it with a cap. Then turn it upside down. It will be
observed that the coin drops faster than the feather. Then, take the air out of
the tube and repeat the same experiment. You will see that the coin and the
feather falling simultancously. It happens so because the acceleration due to
gravity is same in all objects irrespective of their masses.

Let us link the above conclusion with the activity 1.1. In case of dropping
small and large pieces of stones, both of
them hit the ground at the same time. The TT

oy

paper made into a ball falls faster than the
unfolded one because the air resistance on Feather}.
the folded paper is less while that on the

unfolded one is greater and the paper sways Coin + @
in the air and falls slowly. The acceleration

due to gravity in both of them is the same

but the air resistance decreases the
acceleration. Thus, the feather and the coin

fall simultaneously at a place where there is

no air. The resistance due to air increases

with the increase in the surface area of the objects.

Air

  

Science- 10 9


Relation between Radius (R) and acceleration due to gravity (g)

Let mass of any planet or satellite be M, its radius R and mass of an object m,
then according to the law of gravitation,

 

 

 

pe sum
R
Mm . te ome . om
mg =" (according to Newton's 2™° law of motion, W
W=mxg)
= Go%
g- Ga
ga (G and M are constants) fig. 1.3

Thus, acceleration due to gravity is independent of mass of falling body but it
depends upon mass and radius of the planet. Therefore, the acceleration due to
gravity is inversely proportional to the square of radius of the planet.

Acceleration due to gravity of earth

It has already been made clear that the acceleration due to gravity on the earth
is inversely proportional to the square of radius of the earth. As the earth is
not a perfect sphere, the radius(R) of the earth at the poles is minimum. Thus,
the value of acceleration due to gravity (g) is maximum (9.83 m/s’) at the
poles. Likewise, the radius (R) at the equator is maximum, so the value of
acceleration due to gravity (g) is minimum (9.78 m/s”). However, the average
value of ‘g’ on the earth’s surface is assumed as 9.8m/s”.

Now, let’s find the acceleration due to gravity of the earth of mass 6 x 107
kg and radius 6380 km. We have,
GM 6.67 x 10711x6 x 1074
So @aaxi0y?
40.02 x1013

2
"40.70 x10#2 9.83mis

Acceleration due to gravity on other planets or satellites and weight of
objects

In general, weight of an object on the earth means the force of gravity of the
earth acting on that object. According to Newton’s law of motion, F=ma
(mxg) So, to calculate the weight of any object, acceleration due to gravity of
a planet is to be considered. As acceleration due to gravity of the earth is
9.8m/s” , weight of an object having mass 15kg will be ,weight = m x g=15 x
9.8= 147N. Let’s go through the value of acceleration due to gravity of the
others planets and satellites.

Science- 10 10


Example 5

The mass of the moon is 7.2 x10" kg and its radius is
1.7 10° m then find its acceleration due to gravity .Also calculate the
weight of a man having 70kg mass on the moon.

Given,
Mass of the moon (M) = 7.2 x 10” kg

Radius of the moon (R)=1.7 x 10°m
Gravitational constant (G) = 6.67 x 10''Nm?kg
Acceleration due to gravity (g) =?

C. GM 6.67X107™1x7.2x107 =
According to formula, g = SM = 88710 7200" _ 4 6 7ms~?
Re (1.7x10)?

So, acceleration due to gravity (g) is 1.67m/s*.
Again, mass of a man (m)= 70kg
Then, W=mg= 70 x 1.67=116.9N

Therefore, acceleration due to gravity on the surface of the moon is 1.67m/s*
and weight of the man on the moon is 116.9N.

 

Example 6

The mass of the Jupiter is 1.9x10""kg and its radius is 71x10°m. Calculate
its acceleration due to gravity. Also find the weight of a man of 70kg on
the Jupiter.

Given,
Mass of the Jupiter (M) = 1.9 x10°” kg

Radius of the Jupiter (R) = 71* 105m
Gravitational Constant (G) = 6.67 x 107'Nm’kg”

 

Acceleration due to gravity (g) =?

GM _ 667x107"1x1,9x1027

- 2
ee caxaone —— ~ 25m/s

According to formula, g
Again, Mass of man (m) = 70kg
According to formula, W = mg = 70 x 25m/s*= 1750N

Therefore, acceleration due to gravity on the surface of the Jupiter is 25m/s”
and weight of the man on the Jupiter is 1750N.

Science- 10 1


There are some exceptional cases on acceleration due to gravity under certain
circumstances. As the acceleration due to gravity of the Jupiter doesn’t
increase highly as its mass is much bigger than the earth because its radius is
more (11 times more) than that of the earth. Likewise, if the earth is
compressed to a volume equal to that of the moon, its acceleration due to
gravity becomes 14 times.

The mass of the moon is smaller than the earth, So, its acceleration due to
gravity is less than the earth. It is 1/6" of the earth; its value is 1.67m/s”.

Example7

How much mass can be lifted by weightlifter on the surface of the moon if
he can lift 100kg on the earth?[g.=9.8m/s” and g,,=1.67m/s"]

Here, on the earth, mass lifted = 100kg

Weight on earth (we) = mxg.=100 x 9.8-980N

Thus, that man can lift 980N.

Again, On the moon (m)=? W=980N,gn=1.67m/s?

According to formula, W=m.gm or M=W/ £m = 980/1.67 =586.8kg
Therefore, that man can lift 586.8kg on the moon.

Mass and weight
Mass

The total quantity of matter contained in a body is called its mass. It is related
to the inertia of an object i.e. larger the mass greater is the inertia and vice
versa, The mass of a body remains the same wherever in the earth or in the
every part of the universe, Therefore mass of a body always remains constant.
It is measured with a physical balance or a beam balance. The mass of a body
cannot be zero. It’s S.I unit is kilogram (kg). Mass is a scalar quantity.

Mass of an object depends on total number of atoms (particles) and average
mass of atom.

Weight

Weight of a body is the force of gravity acting on that body. Thus, the weight
of a body is defined as the force with which it is pulled towards the centre of
the earth or a planet. It is measured by a spring balance and its S.I. unit is
Newton (N). The weight of a body at a place depends on

Science- 10 12


«mass of the body (m).
+ the value of acceleration due to gravity at the place (g).

The weight of a body is the product of its mass and acceleration due to
gravity. Acceleration due to gravity varies from place to place. That’s why the
weight of a body also varies. For example, radius of the carth is shorter in
polar region than at equator, so the value of g is more at poles. As a result,
weight of an object becomes more at the poles than that at the equator.

Also, weight of an object in Terai is more than that at the top of a mountain.
The weight of an object decreases with the increase in the distance from the
centre of the earth.

Freefall

Ifa sheet of paper and a piece of stone are dropped from certain height on the
earth's surface simultaneously, which one will strike on the surface at first?
Why is there difference in time of fall? Obviously, the piece of stone will hit
the ground before the sheet of paper touches the surface. In such case, the
sheet of paper experiences more air resistance than the piece of stone. The air
resistance lowers the velocity of sheet of paper. But if we drop both paper and
stone in vacuum, they will reach to the surface simultaneously. The
acceleration produced on them is equal despite their unequal mass. So, they
are freely falling objects.

Tn fact, the fall of a body under the effect of gravity in the absence of external
resistance is called freefall.

The acceleration produced on an object during the free fall is equal to the
acceleration due to gravity at the place.

The surface of the moon is not covered by the air. So, the best example of free
fall could be a body falling towards the surface of the moon. Furthermore,
when astronauts drop hammer and a feather on the moon’s surface, they fall
together. Both of them are said to be in freefall.

Activity

‘As shown in the figure, bend an iron rod of about 60 om long into U shape.
Tie its ends with a 30cm long thread. Suspend an iron ball (pendulum) on
another 20cm long thread. Tie the thread of the pendulum at the centre of the
tied thread to the rod. When the thread of the pendulum is raised from P, the
U-shaped frame also rises. What happens when the frame is placed on a table?
Does the pendulum drop down as shown in the figure? It falls down because
of the weight of pendulum.

Science- 10 2B


Now raise the frame holding the thread. Drop the The
frame by releasing the thread from a height of | 1

about 2 meter. Observe the pendulum while the

frame is falling. What will be the position of the ""*"

pendulum? Will it be like figure a or figure b?

Same acceleration is produced on the frame and

the pendulum and both are in freefall. During the
fall, pendulum is seen as in the figure a. here it is

assumed that air has no resistance. ee dP
Weightlessness

Weight of a body on the earth is the force with

which the earth attracts it, We measure the

weight by standing on a weighing machine. we ceening the ere
Suppose a weighing machine is placed on the fig. 1.4

floor of a “lift” parked at the top floor of a tall building, and a man is standing
on the weighing machine. The weighing machine will show the weight of the
man on its scale. Now, if the lift is allowed to fall freely, then both, the
weighing machine as well as the man standing on it, would fall downward
with the same acceleration (g). Under this condition of free fall, it is not
possible for the man to exert weight on the machine because the earth pulls
the weighing machine as rapid as the man, So when the lift is falling freely
under the action of gravity; the weighing machine placed in it would show
zero weight for the man standing on it. And we say that the man is weightless
in a freely falling lift. From the discussion, we conclude that an object is said
to be ‘weightless’ when it is falling freely under the action of gravity.

The effect of weightlessness can be shown by using a spring balance with a
piece of stone hanging on its hook. When the spring balance with hanging
stone is held by hand, it shows the weight of stone as shown in figure 1.5 (a).
Now, release the spring balance; along with its hanging stone and read the
weight of stone as it falls down. It will be observed that when the spring
balance and the stone are falling freely, the spring balance shows zero weight
for the stone as shown in figure 1.5 (b). So, under the conditions of free fall,
the stone is said to be experiencing “weightlessness”.

Science- 10 14


   

 

fig. 1.5 (a) fig. 1.5 (b)
Fig. 1.5 (a) When the spring balance is Fig. 1.5 {b) When the spring balance is falling
held by the hand, it shows a certain freely along with stone, it shows a zero reading
weight (Here the weight is 500 grams) the stone is in the condition of ‘weightless’.

Activity
Take a plastic sheet and cut it out into a circular shape with radius about
15cm. Make small holes near the edge of the circle at about equal distance.
Tie a thread at each hole in such a way that the lengths of the threads are
equal. Make it into a parachute by tying an object at the ends of the threads
and observe its falling velocity after dropping it from certain height.

Summary

1, The gravitational force developed between any two objects is directly
proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to
the square of the distance between their centers.

2. The gravity of the earth is the force with which it attracts an object
towards its centre. Others planets or satellites also have their own gravity.

3. The acceleration produced in a freely falling body is called the
acceleration due to gravity.

4. The attraction due to gravity developed in a freely falling body is
independent of its mass.

5. The acceleration due to gravity of an object falling on the earth is
inversely proportional to the square of the radius of the earth.

The force of gravity acting on a body is called its weight.

7. Free fall is defined as the fall of an object under the effect of gravity only
without any resistance.

8. There is no perfect freefall on the earth due to air resistance.

Science- 10 15


9. An object feels weightlessness as a result of free fall.

10. Weightlessness is the condition in which the effective weight of a body
becomes zero due to the zero reaction force of the earth or other heavenly
bodies.

A. Tick (v) the best alternatives.

1. What is the acceleration due to gravity on the surface of the

moon ?
(a) 9.8m/s (b)1.6m/s”
(c) 6.67x10"''m/s (d) 9.8m/s”

2. What would be the force of attraction between any two objects if masses
of both bodies are made double and distance between their centres is
halved?

(a) 2 times (b) 8 times
(c) 16 times (d) 4 times
3. Which one is correct relation?
(@gaR (b) ga I/R?
()galR (d) ga 1/R*
4. Under what condition does our weight become zero ?
(a) freefall (b) jumping
(c) gal/R? (d) Fa mm,
5. What is the weight of a body in the earth, if its weight is 5N in moon?
(a) 5N (b) 15N
(c) 30N (d) 5/6N
6. What is the value of G on the surface of the moon?
(a) 6.67*10"'Nm’kg? (b) 9.8m/s?
(b) 760mm of Hg (c) 10m/s?

B, Answer the following questions.

1, State Newton’s Universal law of gravitation, Derive the
mathematical expression for it.

Science- 10 16


2. How does the gravitation force of attraction between two
objects having fixed mass vary if the distance between them is
tripled?

3. Define universal gravitational constant. Why is Newton’s law of
gravitation called universal law?

4. Under what condition do the values of gravitational force and
gravitational constant become same/ equal?

5. The earth’s orbit is oval in shape. Explain
how the magnitude of the gravitational force ¢ 6
between the earth and the sun changes as the“ J
:

 

earth moves from position A to B as shown in
the figure.

6. The acceleration due to gravity of the moon is 1.67m/s*, what
does it mean?

7. Prove that the acceleration due to gravity is independent to
the mass of the falling body.

8. Two heavenly bodies having mass ‘m’, and ‘m’, are separated
by a distance ‘d’. What happens

i) if the masses of both the bodies are doubled keeping the
distance between them constant?

ii) if the distance between them is made half keeping their masses
constant?

iii) if the distance between them is reduced by one-third keeping
their masses constant?

9. Explain the coin and feather experiment. What conclusion can be
drawn from the experiment?

10. Under what condition do a feather and an iron ball fall at the same
rate? Explain with reason.

11. What happens to the weight of an object when it is taken from earth
to the moon? Why?

12. What is freefall? In which condition does a body said to be in
freefall?

13. What is weightlessness? Give any two clear examples.
14. Why does a person feel weightlessness during freefall?

Science- 10 17


Cc

=

Differentiate between

Gravitational force and acceleration due to gravity

Noo

Mass and weight
Acceleration due to gravity (g) and gravitation constant (G)
Freefall and Weightlessness

wR Y

Weightlessness in space and weightlessness in the carth
Explain with reasons.

1. The value of acceleration due to gravity varies from place to place on
the surface of the earth.
2. Weight of a body becomes greater at the pole than that at the equator.

3. Mass of Jupiter is 319 times more than that of the earth, but the
acceleration due to gravity of Jupiter is only 2.5 times greater than
that of the earth.

4. A paratrooper jumping from a flying aeroplane lands safely.

5. A feather and a stone having equal mass fall at different rates in air.

Solve the following numerical problems.

1, Calculate the gravitational force in between two objects of
mass 25kg and 20kg if distance between them is Sm. (1.3310°N)

2. Mass of the sun is 2x10°°kg and that of the earth is 6x10™kg and the
distance between them is 1.5 x 10''m. What is the gravitational force
produced between them? (3.6x10"°N)

3. Mass and the radius of the moon are 7.2x10"’kg an
1.7*10°km respectively. Calculate the acceleration due to gravity of
the moon and the weight of a man of mass 70kg on the moon.

(1.6m/s’, 116.2N)

4. Calculate the weight of an object of mass 100kg on the surface of a
planet whose mass and diameter are 4.8x10™k and 12000km

respectively. (889.4N)
5. Mass of the earth is 6x10™kg and its radius is 6400km. What is the
mass of a man weighting 977N? (99.99kg)

6. If an object at a distance 6.4 x 106 m from the centre of earth
weighs 10N, what will be its weight when it is shifted to the
distance of 1.28 x 10’m from the centre of the earth? (2.5)

Science- 10 18


| Pressure
Unit 2

Have you ever thought how a normal human (driver) can run or stop heavy
vehicles like truck, bus etc? How do huge ships along with a large number of
people float on the sea? A driver can stop heavy vehicles on applying very
less amount of force because the brakes of these vehicles work on the basis of
hydraulic press, And the working principle of ship is based on law of
floatation. In this chapter, we study about these principles and other
concerned topics in detail.

Pascal's Law

Blaisé Pascal, born in 1623 AD, is a French mathematician, physicist,
inventor and writer. He propounded the law of liquid pressure (Pascal’s law)
which states that “the pressure exerted at any point in an enclosed liquid, is
transmitted equally in all direction throughout the liquid”.

Activity 2.1

To demonstrate that liquid transmits pressure equal
in all direction, take a plastic bag and fill it with
water and tie its month. Make lots of small holes on
it with the help of a pin. Press the plastic bag gently,
water comes out from all holes simultaneously as
shown in figure 2.1.

Activity 2.2

Take a spherical vessel with four opening with same cross
sectional area as shown in figure no 2.2. Each opening is
fitted with air tight pistons A, B, C and D. Fill the vessel
with water. Press piston A with the certain pressure say
'P’, Ultimately, same magnitude of pressure is transmitted
in all three pistons B, C and D which can be noticed by
the equal displacement of all three pistons due to
pressure.

 

 

Pascal's law is applied in the construction of hydraulic
machine such as hydraulic lift, hydraulic press, hydraulic Fig. 2.2
brakes, etc.

Science- 10 19


Hydraulic press

Hydraulic press is a device constructed on the basis of
Pascal's law. It is used for compressing cotton,
extracting oils from seeds, etc. It contains two hollow
cylinders. The pump tube and press tube are fitted with
air tight pistons A and B. Out of these two pistons, one
has small cross sectional area Ajand another has large
cross sectional area A>. Both of these cylinders are
connected by a horizontal tube filled with liquid. When
small force F; is applied on small piston Aj, pressure

 

Fig. 2.3

applied this piston equals to
2

According to Pascal's law, same magnitude of pressure will be transmitted to
larger piston too, Therefore, pressure in small piston= pressure in large piston.

P\-P2
Fi Fe
Ay Ay

or, Fx Ay = Fox Ai
Since, A2> Ai
Thus, F< F,
That is way a hydraulic machine multiplies the force applied.
Hydraulic lift erent

Fe Fe
Hydraulic lift is also an instrument snails —-

constructed on the basis of Pascal's law. It
is used for raising automobiles like trucks,
buses, cars, motorcycle etc in a garage. The
structure of hydraulic lift is shown in
figure 2.4. When small force is applied on
small piston, a large force is developed on
large piston and heavy vehicles can be
lifted. Fig. 2.4

The magnitude of pressure created in the smaller piston is equal to the
magnitude of pressure transmitted to the larger piston. It implies, a large

magnitude of force is developed on the larger piston when a small magnitude
of force is applied on the smaller piston. You might have seen lorry, car, etc.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Science- 10 20


being lifted with the help of hydraulic jack in the garage. Study the given
figure to know the construction of hydraulic jack.

In the figure 2.4, let area of the smaller piston be Ai, F: be the force applied,
then pressure developed, P; = =

1
This pressure is equally transmitted normally to all directions. As a result,
upward pressure (P2) is developed on the larger piston (Area = A). If F3 is the
force developed on the large piston to balance, then P2 = *2

F,=P2* Az= "2x Ap (Pi = P2 =P)
or, F; = Fix % (At frictionless and leakage free condition).

In the above figure, the valve (V2) checks the flow of the liquid from the large
piston to the small piston. Valve (V;) checks the flow of the liquid to the tank
or it stops distribution of pressure to the tank.

By using hydraulic brake, car, truck and even large aeroplanes moving on the
ground can be stopped with the application of a small magnitude of force.
Example 1

The cross sectional area of the piston A of a hydraulic lift shown in the
figure is 50cm” and that of piston B is 500cm’. What load at piston B can
balance if 4 N effort is applied on piston A?

 

Here, Cross sectional area of piston A (A;) = 50cm? =0.005m”
Cross sectional area of piston B (Az) = 500cm?=0.05m"
Force on piston A (F;) = 4N
Force on piston B (F) =?

 

 

We have,
Fi _ Fe
AL Aa
4N
°F G.005m? — 0.05m?
_ _ 4Nx0.05m?
or 0.005m2
F)=40N

<. 40N load at piston B can be balanced by applying 4N effort on piston A.

Science- 10 2


Density of Liquid and Upthrust

It is a matter of common experience that a body appears lighter when it is
immersed in water. While drawing a bucket full of water from well, we feel
lighter when it is inside the water and suddenly it becomes heavier when it
comes out of water. Inside the water, bucket experiences the upward force of
water. The net upward force exerted by a liquid on a body which is
completely or partially immersed in it is called up thrust or buoyant force.

If w; and w3 are weight of a body in air and water respectively, the upthrust of
the water is given by U = wi-w9. It means the body appears lighter when it is
immersed in a liquid than in air due to upthrust of liquid.

Upthrust experienced by a body depends upon the volume of its immersed
part and density of liquid. Larger the volume of immersed body greater is the
up thrust. Similarly up thrust is directly proportional to the density of liquid.
So, greater the density of liquid, greater will be the upthrust.

Activity 2.3

Take a stone and tie it with a string and weigh it

with spring balance. Record it as the weight of Spring

stone in air. Now immerse the stone completely Balence

in water and weigh it again with spring balance.

Record it as the weight of stone in water. You Y

will find that the weight of stone in water is less | ra
than that of in air. This loss of weight of a body stone

when immersed in liquid is equal to the up"

thrust of that liquid.
Fig. 25

-. Up thrust = weight of body in air — weight of body in liquid
Activity 2.4

Take two beakers A and B. Fill beaker A with freshwater and beaker B with
saturated salt solution. Put an egg in each beaker and observe. An egg sinks in
fresh water but it floats on salty water. This is because the density of salty
water is greater than that of fresh water, which results greater upthrust in salty
‘water.

Science- 10 22

Water


   

    

J
Egg
@-

Freshwater Salt Solution.

Fig. 2.6
Archimedes’ Principle

 

Archimedes was born in 287 BC in Syracuse,
Sicily. He was a mathematician, physicist,
engineer, inventor and astronomer too. After
performing many experiments on upthrust,
Archimedes finally formulated Archimedes’
principle which states “when a body is immersed partially or completely in a
liquid (fluid), it experiences an upthrust which is equal to the weight of liquid
(or fluid) displaced”

Upthrust = Weight of displaced liquid Spring balance

Do you know?
Archimedes principle is
also applicable to gases.

 

 

 

To verify Archimedes’ principle, tic a stone
with a string. Take its weight with the help of
spring balance. This is recorded as the weight
of the stone in air. As shown in figure 2.7, take
eureka can and fill it with water. An empty
beaker is placed under the spout of eureka can

and place it on the pan balance. Also measure | Beaker
the weight of the empty beaker.
Top Pan

  

Now, immerse the stone completely in water in
eureka can, Then note the weight of the stone Fig. 2.7

inside the water. The water displaced by the completely immersed stone flows
from the spout of eureka can and gets collected in the beaker. The weight of
displaced water and beaker is recorded by pan balance.

 

balance

Now, we have,
Weight of the stone in air = Wi

Weight of the empty beaker = W>

Weight of the stone in water = W3

Weight of beaker along with displaced water = Wa

Science- 10 23


Then,

Weight of displaced water = Ws W2

Loss of weigh of the stone in water = W, — Ws

Thus, Ws— W2 = W3 — W.= upthrust

ie, weight of displaced water = loss of weight of stone = _upthrust

Hence, Archimedes principle is experimentally verified, Due to the upthrust
of liquid, any object immersed in it loses some of its weight.

Law of floatation

The law of floatation states “when a body floats in a liquid it displaces the
liquid whose weight is equal to its own weight”.

For a floating body,

Weight of floating body = weight of displaced liquid.
Activity 2.5

Take an eureka can, a beaker, spring i a:

balance, pan balance, a wooden block and
a string. Tie the wooden block with strong
stings, weigh it with the help of spring
balance. When it is immersed in water, the
displaced water over flows from spout of
eureka can andget collected in the empty
beaker.

  
  

Wt. of
displaced
water =W,
Finally, it can be concluded as, Fig. 2.8
weight of the floating body = weight of the liquid displaced
Example 1

An object weights 20N in air and 15N in water. What is the up thrust
exerted by water and what is the weight of the displaced water?

Here,
Weight of an object in air (W,) =20N
Weight of an object in water (Ww) = 15N
Up thrust of water (U) =?

Weight of the displaced water (Wa) =?

Science- 10 24


We know,
Up thrust (U)=weight of body in air (W.) — weight of body water (W,).
= 20N - 1SN=5N

Again,
Weight displaced liquid (Wy) = up thrust

2. We=5N
<. The upthrust of water and the weight of displaced liquid is SN.
Atmospheric pressure
Our earth is surrounded by a layer of air called atmosphere. The gases in the
atmosphere are nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide and other gases. The
atmosphere has a mass of about 5.15 x 10'* kg and extends up to about
1000km from the surface of the earth, So, it exerts pressure on the surface of

the earth, The pressure exerted by the weight of air on the surface of the earth
is called atmospheric pressure. It is also called barometric pressure.

At sea level, the atmospheric pressure is about 1.01 x 10°pascal or 760mm of
Hg. It is also known as one standard atmosphere pressure. The atmospheric
pressure varies from place to place on the surface of the earth as the density of
air in the atmosphere decreases with altitude and thickness of the atmosphere.

Atmospheric pressure has effects on all the objects and living organism. Both
low and high atmospheric pressure is unsuitable for living organism.

Activity 2.6

Fill a glass with water upto the rim and cover it with a postcard or thick piece
of paper. Press gently with palm to remove any air bubbles present. Then
gently hold the glass and make it upside down putting one palm over the
postcard, slowly remove the palm. The postcard remains attached with the
water surface and the water in glass does not fall. This is because upward
force on the postcard i.e. atmospheric pressure is greater than the downward
force on the postcard due to weight of the water.

Science- 10 25


Measurement of atmospheric pressure

The atmospheric pressure can be measured with the help of a device called

barometer. This scientific instrument was invented by

the scientist named

Evangelist Torricelli in 1643. There are different types of barometer such as
mercury barometer, aneroid barometer etc. But in this unit, we will discuss

about mercury barometer only.
Mercury barometer

‘A mercury barometer consists of a glass tube of 100 cm
in length. At first, it is filled completely with mercury
and then it is inverted over mercury filled trough as
shown in figure. There should not be air bubbles inside
the tube. Therefore special attention and precautions are
taken to avoid the air bubbles inside the glass tube.
While doing so the mercury level in the glass tube falls
slightly creating a vacuum at the top as shown in figure.
This vacuum so created is called toricellian vacuum,
The tube is made erect with the help of support and is
graduated with scale. When the atmospheric pressure

Vacuum

  
  

Glass tube

Atmospheric

=

v

Mercury Fig. 2.9

decreases, the mercury level also decreases. Similarly, when the atmospheric
pressure increases the mercury level the glass tube increases. This reading is

taken with the help of graduated scale in the glass tube.
Some common devices that use air pressure
Syringe

Syringe is a medicinal device used in the hospitals and

clinies for injecting

medicines inside the body and to cject blood from the body of the patients.

Mainly, syringe consists of a piston, a barrel and a needle.

First of all, piston is pushed into the barrel in
order to take out air from it. Then the needle
of the syringe is inserted into the liquid
(medicine, blood etc). Since all the air of the
barrel is taken out, the pressure in the barrel
decreases. The piston of the syringe is pulled
slowly. As we pull the piston, there occurs
vacuum in the storage cylinder. As the liquid
always move from higher pressure region to

 

low pressure region, the medicine moves toward the storage cylinder as there
is low pressure. Now, the needle is taken out from the bottle and inserted in
the blood streams of the patient. As we push the piston, the medicine moves

Science- 10

26


into the body through blood vessel. Similarly, the blood is ejected out from
the body of the patients.

Air pump

The pump used to fill up the atmospheric air into
the rubber tubes of vehicles, bicycles, etc. is called
air pump. Any air pump consists of a piston, a
barrel and a rubber pipe. Piston is provided with a
valve. The piston valve opens when the piston
moves up and it gets closed when the piston is
pushed down. Rubber pipe is connected to the
rubber tube in which atmospheric air is to be
filled. This tube consists of a valve too which

controls the back flow of air. Fig. 2.11

When the piston moves down in barrel the pressure in the barrel increases, the
air in it gets squeezed. Due to which the valve in the piston is closed and the
valve in rubber tube is opened. The squeezed air moves into the rubber tube
through the rubber pipe. This is called down stroke. At the same time, the air
from the atmosphere enters into the barrel above the piston through a small
hole provided on the top of the barrel.

When piston moves up, the pressure in the barrel decreases, the valve in
rubber tube closes and the valve in the piston opens. This is called upstroke.
During this stroke, the air above the piston is collected below the piston. The
repeated action of down stroke and upstroke fills the air inside the rubber
tube.

Water pump

The manually operating pump which is
used for lifting water from well or any
underground reservoir is called water
pump. A water pump consists of a piston
with handle, a barrel, a metal pipe. The

   
    
   
  

Pump rod

piston with handle moves up and down in ‘ner
the barrel, It is provided with a piston Pion
valve which opens when piston moves _—

down and closes when piston moves up.
The pipe is fitted at the bottom of the — sxione bang ata
barrel goes to the water reservoir. Another eS
valve (foot valve) is provided at the
bottom of the barrel, which opens when

Science- 10 27


the piston moves up and it gets closed when the piston moves down.
Upstroke

Just like air pump, water pump also works in two strokes. When the piston is
moved upward with the help of the handle, the pressure in the barrel decreases
and the valve in the piston is closed. The air pressure above the surface of
water pushes the water up then the foot valve at the bottom of the barrel opens
and the water enters into the barrel. This is called upstroke.

Down stroke

When the piston moves down, the pressure in the barrel increases and the
valve in the piston is opened and foot valve gets closed. At this time, the
water collected in the barrel below the piston moves up through piston valve.
This is called down stroke. During this stroke, water comes out of barrel
collected as per necessity.

Summary

1. Pascal's law states that the pressure exerted at any point in an enclosed
liquid is transmitted equally in all direction throughout the liquid.

2. Inany hydraulic machine, following relation is valid.

ALR
AL Ag
Up thrust of any liquid is directly proportional to its density.

4. Archimedes principle states that when a body is immersed partially or
completely in a fluid, if experiences up thrust which is equal to the
weight of fluid displaced.

5. Law of floatation states that when a body floats in a liquid it displaces the
liquid whose weight is equal to its own weight.

6. Law of floatation is applied in the operating ships, submarines, hot air
balloons, etc.

7. The pressure exerted by the atmosphere due to its weight is called
atmospheric pressure.

8. Atmospheric pressure is measured by using scientific instrument
called barometer.

9. The devices such as syringe, air pump, water pump, etc. are
constructed on the basis of air pressure.

Science- 10 28


 

A. Choose the best alternatives.

1.

Which one of the following is not the unit of pressure?

(a) N/kg °C (b) pascal

(c) mm of Hg (d) Nim?

On which principle does a hydraulic machine base on ?

(a) Pascal's law (b) Archimedes principle
(c) Law of floatation (d) Hydraulic principle

In which condition, does a substance having greater density
than water float on it?

(a) If it is pressed.
(b) If it displaces water equal to its weight.
(c) If its weight is decreased.

(d) If its surface area is decreased.

 

Which one of following devic
pressure?

is used to measure the atmospheric

(a) Thermometer (b) Seismograph
(c) Barometer (d) Voltmeter

Which one of the following factors is directly proportional to density
of liquid?

(a) Temperature (b) Volume of liquid
(c) Upthrust (d) Density of object
What is the normal atmospheric pressure?

(a) 760 mm of Hg (b) 1.01 x 10°Pa

(c) 9.8 Nim” (d) Both of i and ii.

If weight of a body in air is 30N and that in water is 25N, what is the
upthrust acting on it?

(a) 10N (c)5N
(b) 25N (d) 30N

Science- 10 29


8.

Why is it easier to pull bucket of water from the well until it is inside
the water?

(a) Due to mass of the water
(b) Due to volume of water of well
(c) Due to up thrust

(d) Due to liquid pressure

B. Answer the following questions.

1.
2.
3.

10.
11.

Science- 10

i, Which one is pure

ii, Why does the egg

State Pascal's law. Write any two applications of Pascal's law.
What is hydraulic lift?

How does hydraulic press work? Write any two uses of hydraulic
press.

We experience nose bleeding while trekking to high altitude,
why?

What is up thrust? What is the relation between density of
liquid and it's up thrust?

The pieces of ice float on water. Give reason.

Why is it easier to swim in sea than in a pond or river?

Study the figure given below and answer the following questions:

water and which one
is salty water?

sink in the water in
the beaker (a) and
float on the water in
the beaker (b)?

State Archimedes principle. Draw a labeled diagram to verify
Archimedes’ principle.

 

State law of floatation.

An iron nail sinks in water but a huge ship made up of iron floats on
it, why?

. How does a hot air balloon rise up?

30


15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

. What is atmospheric pressure? Name the instrument that measures

atmospheric pressure.

. Explain an experiment to demonstrate the existence of atmospheric

pressure.
Define the terms syringe and barometer.

How is mercury barometer constructed?

Describe the working mechanism of a common hand pump.
Explain the roles of piston valve of a water pump.

A child is getting a vaccine for measles. Explain in detail how the
medicine enters into the syringe then injected to the body of child
from medicine bottle,

C. Differentiate between

1.

D. Solve the following numerical problems.

1.

Force and pressure 2. Pressure and upthrust

In the given hydraulic press the cross
sectional area of cylinder A; and Aj are
0.25m* and 8m” respectively, what magnitude
of effort is to be applied on cylinder A; to
balance a load of 1000N on the cylinder Ai?

 

 

The weight of a piece of stone, when immersed in water is 10N. If it
displaces 2N of water when it is immersed, find the weight of the
stone in air.

(12N)

If piston A, B and C in the given diagram are supposed to be friction
less, what is the area of the piston B? Calculate force exerted on the
piston C. (30 cm’ ,125N)

 

Science- 10 31


4. Study the given figure and answer the following questions.

i. What is the mass and the
weight of the object in the Spring blance

:

air?

ii. How much upthrust is
exerted on the object?

   

Stone

a

water

iii. On which principle does
this
experiment base on? State
the principle.

 

 

Pan balance

Project work

1.

Get a tin can with a small screw cap. Clean the can, pour some water in
it. Heat it. Let the water boil for a couple of minutes. Shut off the heat
and quickly, cover the can tightly with its cap. It collapses, why? Discuss
with friend and make a report of this activity and show it to your teacher.

If possible visit a nearby garage. Observe how hydraulic lift is used there.
Make a short report on working principle of hydraulic lift and present it
to your class.

Take a plastic bottle of capacity two litres and fill its half with clean
water. Take a long straw and insert it in the bottle. Wrap lumps of wheat
flour around the straw to seal the bottle. Blow hard your breath through
the straw, then stand back, your blowing increases the air pressure inside
the sealed bottle which pushes the water out of the straw. Your mini
water fountain experiment is successful. Do it under the supervision of
your teacher.

Science- 10 32


Unit 3 Energy

After a hard games or a long run, one often hears the comment:’ Oh I am
finished! I have no energy left.’ Most people feel like this at the end of the
day after having a day’s work. The energy they had in the morning has been
spent during the day. And after their meal you may hear from them” I am full
of energy again”. What does food do?

Food enables us not only to breath but also to perform the activities like
running, carrying books to school or playing a game. Just as a motor car needs
fuel to run, so do our bodies need energy which is supplied by the food. Fuel
supplies, energy to a car and makes it run. Food supplies energy to enable us
to carry out various activities.

Sources of energy

We get energy from different sources. The substances which can provide
enough useful energy at a steady rate over a long period of time is called
source of energy. There are mainly two sources of energy -non renewable
sources of energy and renewable sources of energy

Non renewable sources of energy

The sources of energy which are depleted or exhausted after a certain period
of time if they are used continuously are called non renewable sources of
energy. These sources have been accumulated in nature over long period of
time, e.g. coal, mineral oil, natural gas and other fossil fuels. They take a long
interval of time to form again when they get used up.

Renewable sources of energy

The sources of energy which are inexhaustible and can be replaced as they
have been used up are called renewable sources of energy. They can be used
again and again.

These sources are available in an unlimited amount in nature and develop
within a relatively short period of time, e.g. solar energy , wind energy, hydro
power energy, geothermal energy, tidal energy, biomass energy, etc. These
sources of energy can be replaced in short interval of time if they are
exhausted at their original place.

Science- 10 33


Sun as the ultimate source of energy

The sun plays a vital role for the existence of living things on the earth. It
provides energy to all the living organisms directly or indirectly. We use
fossil fuel, hydro electricity, bio fuel, tidal energy, geo thermal energy which
are also the direct or indirect forms of solar energy. Whatever sources of
energy are available on the earth they are transformed from the solar energy.
‘Thus, it is a fact that the sun is the ultimate source of all types of energy.

Plants prepare food by photosynthesis using solar energy. The animals obtain
their food from the plants for their survival. Thus, the energy consumed from
plants by animals is converted into their muscular energy which is also the
indirect form of solar energy. Fossil fuels are formed from these plants and
animals buried in the earth for millions of the years when they get heated in
the absence of oxygen. So, fossil fuel is also an indirect product of solar
energy.

Formation of river, ocean and rain is only possible by the evaporation of
water by the heat of the sun. The flowing water is used to rotate turbines and
generate hydroclectricity. Thus, the hydroclectricity is the outcome of solar
energy.

When the air of a place gets heated up by the heat from the sun, the hot rises
up creating a partial vacant space. The cooler air from another region moves
towards such vacant place with great speed forming wind. Hence, wind
energy is also considered as an indirect product of solar energy.

Likewise, biomass is the organic matter and residue, which is formed with the
help of solar energy. Due to the above reasons, the solar energy or the sun is
the ultimate source of energy.

Facts about the Sun

The sun is the large massive heavenly body containing hydrogen (70%) and
helium (28%).

Mass: 2 x 10°kg (3.33 <10° times greater than the Earth)
Diameter: 1.4 x 10° km (10 times greater of the Earth)
Temperature of the surface: 5700°C

Core temperature: 1.5  10’°C (approximately)

Energy radiation: 4 x 10°°J/s (approximately)

Average solar energy received by the Earth: 1.4 kW/m’ per second

Science- 10 34


Sources of energy and their uses
Fossil fuel

The remains of dead animals and plants which were buried under the earth’s
crust millions of years ago are called fossils. The fuel formed from such
fossils is called fossil fuel. Coal, minerals oils and natural gases are formed
from the fossils and hence they are fossil fuel.

The plants and animals of millions of years ago buried deep inside the earth
get converted into fossil fuel, when they get subjected to high pressure and
temperature.

Coal

Coal is used as fuel in industries, factories and trains. It is also used in metal
industries like iron, steel, etc. In Nepal, the occurrence of high quality coal,
i.e. anthracite has not yet been detected. However, low quality coal (lignite)
mines are found in Dang district. It takes millions of years for the formation
of coal. As coal is no renewable, they should be used rationally.

Mineral oil

Petrol, diesel, kerosene are called mineral oil. They are mainly used in
vehicles like motor car, ship, aeroplane, etc. These mineral oil are extracted
from the deep mines beneath the surface of the earth. Crude oil is taken out
from the mine. They vary in their carbon content, volatile matter and moisture
context, When the crude oil is refined, we get petrol, kerosene, diesel, etc.
along with residual oil. On further refining the residual oil, we get asphalt,
paraffin and lubricating oil. Asphalt is used for road construction. The raw
materials used for making plastics are also produced after refining the mineral
oil. Liquefied petrolcum gas (LPG), which is used as cooking gas is also
obtained during the purification of crude oil. It takes millions of year for the
formation of mineral oil. It is also the non renewable source of energy. The
advantages of fossils fuel are mentioned below.

i. Fossil fuels are cheaper and easily available..
ii, It can easily be transported in any needy places.

iii, It is used for various purposes like to run industries, automobiles,
generators, etc.

iv. It can also be used to generate electricity.

Science- 10 35


Hydropower

Hydro electricity generated in the hydropower station is the source of energy
which is used to run electrical appliances like computer, radio, TV, telephone,
etc. Huge amount of electricity can be generated from the current of fast
flowingwater. Although the production cost for the generation of
hydroelectricity is high in the beginning, it is cheaper on the long run.

Hydropower is the most potential source of energy in Nepal. In the world’s
list, Nepal belongs to the second richest country in hydroelectric power
potentially. It has been estimated that total hydropower capacity of Nepal is
about 83,000 MW but at present less than 1000MW of electricity is generated.

Hydroelectric Dam

Powerhouse
Generator

 

Long distance Power Linos

 

Fig. 3.1

The advantages of hydroelectricity are mentioned below.

i, Although the production cost is high, hydroelectricity is cheaper in long
term.

ii, It supplies energy without pollution.
iii, It is a renewable source of energy. So it will never get exhausted.
iv. It is easy to transform to other form of energy. Thus it is considered as a
multipurpose source of energy.
v. It is widely used in electric and electronic devices.
Alternative sources of energy

Those sources of the energy which are developed to reduce the load on non
renewable sources of energy are called alternative sources of energy. All the
renewable and perpetual sources of energy are considered as alternative
sources of energy. Such sources of energy are used to maintain the storage of
the conventional source of energy. Non renewable sources of energy exhaust

Science- 10 36


after their broadly use and causes energy crisis in near future. To solve this
crisis problem, it is necessary to use the alternative sources of energy. In the
present context of the world, following alternative sources are being used as
alternative sources of energy.

Bio mass

The agricultural residue, animal waste, food weeds, etc. are collectively called
biomass. The energy obtained from biomass is called biomass energy. Hay,
straw, stalks of jute and maize, husk, saw dust, firewood, animal dung, etc.
are the sources of biomass energy. In rural areas of Nepal, the cattledung is
changed into circular or cylindrical shape and then dried over the sun light to
use as fuel (guintha).

The biogas plant is constructed using modern technology so that the gas
produced from cattle waste in the bio gas plant is used to set fire which is free
from pollution. It contains methane, carbon dioxide, hydrogen and hydrogen
sulphate gases.

The waste product obtained after producing biogas can further be used as
organic fertilizer in agriculture. Human wastage and poultry droppings can
also be used to produce biogas. Government has also provided help and
subsidy for the construction of bio gas plant. The use of bio-fuel is effective in
village and hilly regions. Following are the advantages of biogas.

i. The raw materials cost no money and are easily available in rural
areas.

ii, Tt. can be used for cooking as well as lighting purpose.

iii, It does not produce smoke on burning and hence it does not cause air
pollution.

iv. The wastage product obtained after the production of biogas can be
used as a good organic fertilizer.

Nuclear Energy

The enormous amount of energy is released when two or more nuclei undergo
a nuclear reaction. This type of energy is called nuclear energy. Nuclear
energy can be produced either by fusing nuclei or splitting the heavy nucleus.

When two or more light nuclei combine to form heavy nucleus under high
temperature and pressure, the large amount of energy released in the form of
heat and light. This process is called nuclear fusion. Hydrogen bombs are
made on the basis of reaction involved in such process. In the sun and stars,

Science- 10 37


there is regular process of nuclear fusion reaction resulting the production of
heat and light energy continuously.

The process in which an unstable nucleus of heavy atom (like Uranium-235)
splits up into two lighter nuclei with the liberation of a large amount of energy
is called nuclear fission.

The desigentreted mass during fusion and fission reaction get converted into
energy according to the relation propounded by Albert Einstein. Einstein’s
mass energy relation is used for the calculation of nuclear energy. According
to it, mass (m) can be converted into energy (E) equivalent to me?[ E=mc’],
where c is the velocity of light in vacuum, i.e. 3 x 10%m/s.

Nuclear fission process is carried out in a nuclear power plant. The heat thus
produced is used to obtain stem from boiling water. The steam operates the
large steam engines which run

generator to produce electricity. a

Thus, electricity is produced by the
generator. Thousands of megawatts
of electricity can be generated by this
means but it needs very high Wave
temperature and pressure to carry out
nuclear fission reaction. Hence,
thermonuclear fusion reaction is not
practically feasible though it
produces enormous energy than
fission reaction.

    

Air chamber

Tidal energy Fig, 3.2

Nowadays, new techniques are developed to generate electricity from the
tides and the waves of ocean. The tides occur in the oceans due to the
gravitation force of the sun and the moon on the water of oceans.

The water carried by the tides can be collected in tidal dams constructed at the
certain height of seashores. During low tide, the level of ocean falls below the
level of water in the dam and then the water released to fall on the turbine
which drives the generator to produce electricity. The tidal energy can
produce electricity only at certain time and for a short period and also the
process needs suitable sites. But this source of energy is not possible in our
country.

Science- 10 38


Wind energy

Traditionally, wind energy has been used as important source of energy. It is
being used to drive windmills, which in turn operate water lifting pumps and
flour mills. It is renewable source of energy and it does not produce any
environmental pollution.

Wind Energy

me — ily y

Sane rouse

   

ecrraty ne

 

Fig. 3.3

Wind blows with high speed almost all the times in most parts of our country.
If the wind turbines are set up in the windy areas, the wind rotates the large
fans. Then, the generator connected to the turbine generates electricity. There
is high potentiality of wind energy in Mustang district. The energy possessed
by the blowing air is called wind energy.

Geothermal energy

The inner and outer core of the earth is extremely hot. The temperature below
the earth’s surface increases by about 30°C per kilometre in non volcanic
region, whereas it increases at the rate of 80°C per kilometre in active
volcanic regions.

In order to obtain geothermal energy, two parallel holes are drilled deep
below the earth’s crust. Water is passed through a hole which gets converted
into stem due to the enormous heat hidden below the earth crust. The stem
thus formed is carried out through another hole which is used to rotate
turbines to generate electricity. So, the energy that can be obtained from the
heat present inside the earth is called geothermal energy.

Turbine

| er

aa

 

Science- 10 39


Solar energy

The sun is the most abundant and everlasting source of energy on the earth.
The energy given by the sun is called solar energy.

The solar cell is a device
which converts solar energy
directly into electric energy
by the help of photo cells.
Beside the traditional uses,
solar energy is used either
by converting it into heat or
electricity. It is used in
operating artificial satellite
as well as operating
communication devices in
remote areas. The use of
solar energy does not produce any pollution.

 

Fig. 3.5

Energy crisis

 

il fuels are being used as the major sources of energy till now. The
natural gas, coal and mineral oil have been fulfilling about 80% energy
demand of the world. The sources of these fuels are mines but they are
limited in nature. Also the sources of these fuels are not renewable. Therefore,
it is very likely that the storage of fuel is used up in the near future.

 

According to a survey done in 1984 AD, it was predicted that the mineral oil
reserves will have been emptied within 25 to 30 years but it has been
estimated in mid Eastern Asia that there is still new storage of oil three times
bigger than the existing one. The demand for these minerals oil and coal is
increased by 2.3% every year with the pace of development. According to
various sources, storage of these minerals oils will be depleted by 2037 AD.
Thus, the world is likely to face a problem of scarcity of energy for daily use.

 

The future scarcity of energy sources on the earth due to over population,
urbanisation and industrialization is called energy crisis.

Present status of energy use and its conservation

At present, 35% of energy demand of the world has been covered by mineral
oil. The consumption of this non renewable source of energy has been
increased with rapid population growth and various development activit
Similarly, the consumption of coal is more in the industrialized countrie
About 27% of energy demand has been covered by coal and yearly it is

 

Science- 10 40


increasing by 2.3%. Biomass energy is being used mainly in rural parts of
developing countries. It covers about 13% of the energy need of the world.
Hydro electricity is supplying about 5% of the commercial energy used in the
world whereas nuclear energy covers about 3% of energy demand. Every
individual and local level must be conscious about the energy crisis.
Following steps can be considered to save the energy.

i. Alternative sources of energy should be developed and used wisely.
ii, Non renewable sources of energy should be preserved for the future.

iii, Rapid population growth should be controlled and awareness about the
importance of energy conservation should be created in public.

Summary

1. The inexhaustible sources of energy which can be regained in the nature
in short interval of time are called renewable sources of energy.

2. The energy source that cannot be regained once it is depleted is called non
renewable energy source i.e it takes millions of year to. regenerate.

3. The ultimate source of energy in this earth is the Sun. The sources of
energy like wood, coal, mineral oil, hydropower, wind etc. are the
outcomes of solar energy.

4. Hydroelectricity is cheaper, pollution free, renewable and easy to transmit.
5. The waste materials of plants and animals are called biomass.

6. Coal and minerals oils are formed from fossils so they are called fossil
fuels.

7. The scarcity of energy that is likely to happen due to the depletion of fuel
reserves is known as energy crisis.

8. Those sources of energy which are used to reduce the load an non
renewable sources of energy are called alternative sources of energy.

9. The habit of conserving fuel should be practiced in order to solve energy
crisis.

Science- 10 41


 

A. Tick (v) the best alternatives.

1. What is assumed as the ultimate source of the energy?
(a) electricity (b) sun
(©) mineral oils (@) natural gases

2. How much solar energy is received by every square meter of the
earth per second at day time?

 

(a) 1.6kW (b) 1.4kW
(c) 60kW (d) 14kW
3. In the context of Nepal, which one is the most suitable energy source?
(a) nuclear energy (b) geothermal energy
(c) wind energy (d) hydropower
4. Which of the following is Einstein mass- energy relation?
(a) E=me (b) E=mc”
(c) E= Gmm (d) E=mgh
5. Onwhich principal is the hydrogen bomb based?
(a) nuclear fission (c) nuclear fusion
(b) displacement reaction (d) Archemedies’ principle

6. What is scarcity of energy?

(a) energy consumption

(b) energy crisis

(c) alternative sources of energy

(d) renewable sources of energy
B. Answer the following questions.

1. What is a renewable source of energy? Give two examples.

“The sun is regarded as the main sources of energy.” Justify it.

How is coal formed? Why is it called the fossil fuel?

eFYen

Mention the differences between fossils fuel and alternative
energy sources with examples.

Science- 10 42


5. What are the advantage of solar energy over fossil fuel energy?

6. What is nuclear energy? What do the symbols stand for the relation
E=me"?

7. How can we trap geothermal energy?

8. Why is hydroelectricity called the “most suitable energy” for
Nepal?

9. What types of energy sources are referred to as “Alternative
energy sources”? Why is the development and use of alternative
energy sources necessary in today’s world?

10. What is meant by energy crisis? Write any two points to justify that
urbanization brings energy crisis.

Differentiate between

1. renewable and non-renewable resources

2. solar energy and fossil fuel energy

3, nuclear fusion and nuclear fission

Explain with reason.

1, Hydropower should be used rather than coal and mineral oil.
2. Fossil fuel has been used more in the existing world.

3. The sun is considered as a major source of energy.

4. Excess use of fossil fuel causes energy crisis.

Project work

1.

How much is spent monthly for the fuel energy in your house?
Collect the data about how much investment is made for the bill of
electricity, kerosene, coal, wood and petrol monthly. Make a pie chart to
represent the expenses on those titles.

Make a paper fan and join it to cork with a thumb pin. Insert a refill into
the cork and then tie a piece of thread with weight on the refill. Support
this arrangement where air can flow. When the fan runs, what mass can
the thread wound around the refill lift up?

Science- 10 43


unit 4 Heat

When we rub our palms together, palms become hot. Similarly, when we
pump air into the tires of a bicycle continuously air pump gets heated up. Can
you think why it is so? When we touch cold water, we feel cold, when we
touch boiling water we feel hot. What is such feeling of coldness and hotness
called? In first two cases, the mechanical energy is converted into the heat
energy. Similarly, the causes of feeling of hotness and coldness are due to
flow of something in the form of energy from one body to the other body. The
flow of energy from our body to the cold water has given us the feeling of
coldness. Similarly, the flow of energy from hot water to our body has given
feeling of hotness. Thus, the energy that flows from a hotter body to another
body producing the sensation of hotness and coldness is called heat. In
another word, heat can be defined as the form of energy which produces the
sensation of warmth.

Heat and Temperature

Molecular theory states that each object is made up of molecules and they are
in motion about their mean position. Hence, an object possesses kinetic
energy due to the motion of each molecule of the object.

When we heat an object the molecules presence in the object vibrate and the
kinetic energy of the molecules increases. So, average kinetic energy of the
molecules of a substance also increases. The average kinetic energy in the
molecules of hot object is more than in cold object. Hence, the quantity of
heat present in an object depends upon following two factors:

i. Number of molecules

 

ii, Average kinetic energy of the molecules

Thus, the heat contained in an object is directly linked to the kinetic energy of
its molecules. Hence, heat energy of an object is defined as the sum of the
kinetic energy that the molecules of an object posseses. It is measured by
using calorimeter and its S.L.unit is Joule(J).

When an object is heated, its temperature increases. It is due to the increase in
the kinetic energy of the molecules that form the object. According to kinetic
theory of molecules, the temperature of an object increases due to increase in
average kinetic energy of all the molecules of that object. The temperature of
an object is directly proportional to the molecular vibration of an object.

Science- 10 44


Heat and temperature are closely related. On heating a body, the heat energy
is absorbed by its molecules and the amount of heat as well as the temperature
(except during the change of state) of the body increase. Similarly, on cooling,
the temperature of a body decreases. Thus, heat is the cause of temperature
rise. Temperature is measured by an instrument named thermometer in any
standard unit °C, °F, K whereas heat is measured by calorimeter.

Activity 4.1

Take two beakers of same size and fill one of them with 50g of water and
another with 100g of water, keep the bulb of thermometer as shown in figure.
Heat both the beakers with burners having same capacity for in same time.
Note down the temperature of the water of each beakers every two minutes.

    
 

    
 

Thermometer-
|

Beaker.

Stand Stand

Water

Tripod
Stand

Does the temperature of water in both the beakers increase equally?

Temperature arises due to the average kinetic energy of molecules of the
objects. The objects with less mass have greater average kinetic energy of
molecules, if equal amount of heat is supplied. But the temperature is not
defined in vacuum as there is no molecules and mass. Hence, heat depends on
mass while temperature does not.

Activity 4.2

Take two beakers of the same size. Put 150ml of cold water in first beaker and
same amount of hot water in next beaker. Observe and note the reading of the
thermometers dipped into those water of different beakers after a certain time
interval. Now, take a big beaker and mix the water of previous both beakers in
it and measure the temperature of the mixture. What do you observe?

Science- 10 45


Stand

 

The temperature of the mixture of water is different than that of cold water
and hot water. The mixture has higher temperature than the cold water
whereas less temperature than that of hot water. Thus, heat flows from a body
at higher temperature to the one at lower temperature, until the temperature of
the two becomes the same irrespective of the quantities of heat present in two
bodies. In another way, if two systems are in thermal equilibrium then they
are at same temperature.

Thermometer and its structure

The branch of physics which deals with heat is called thermodynamics. A
device which is designed to measure temperature is called a thermometer. The
working principle of thermometer is based on the fact that a "body expands on

heating and contracts on cooling". In other words, the thermometer is based
on the property of thermal expansion of the thermometric used in it.

A general thermometer consists a glass stem with a fine and uniform hollow
capillary tube inside it. One end of the glass stem is sealed and at the other
end a thin walled bulb presents inside of which a thermometric liquid is kept.
The capillary tube provides space for the expansion of thermometric liquid
while measuring the temperature of a body. The glass stem is calibrated with
suitable thermometric scales.

The liquid that is used in thermometer is called thermometric liquid.
Generally mercury and alcohol are used as thermometric liquids. Let's have
brief discussion about these thermometric liquids.

Science- 10 46


Mercury

Mercury is only a metal that is in liquid state at room temperature which is
silvery, opaque and can easily be seen in capillary tube during its raise and
fall. It is good conductor of heat and is sensitive to heat as well which
expands and contracts uniformly in a wide range of temperature. Mercury
remains in liquid state over a wide range of temperature i.e. -39°C (freezing
point) to 357°C (boiling point). The mercury thermometer cannot be used to
measure the temperature in very cold regions.

Alcohol

Alcohol is cheaper, easily available and colorless thermometer liquid. Alcohol
expands sixth time more than mercury and hence it gives better accuracy than
mercury. The range of alcohol remains liquid to very low temperature
(freezing point -115°C) but not at higher temperature ic. beyond 78°C
(boiling point). Due to this reason, alcohol thermometer is used for measuring
the temperature in very cold regions.

Types of thermometer and their uses

On the basis of the structure, thermometer is classified into many types. They
are used for various purposes.

a) Clinical thermometer

The thermometer which is used to measure our body temperature is
known as clinical thermometer. A clinical thermometer is only used to
measure the temperature of human body. It consists of a long, narrow and
uniform glass tube with a bulb containing mercury at one end. It has a
kink in the fine capillary tube near the bulb to avoid the backward flow
of mercury when it is removed from the body. Hence, the accurate
temperature can be

mercury thread

noted. It needs a gentle

jerk before the use so

that mercury is collected

ack to the bulb f 5
back to the bulb for next i constriation Fig. 4.3

use.

The clinical thermometer is made on prismatic shape so that we clearly
notice the scale readings when viewed in suitable angle. There are mainly
two scales on the thermometer. Celsius scale is indicated by °C. In the
Celsius scale, clinical thermometer reads temperature from 35°C to 42°C.
The range 94°F to 108°F is for the Fahrenheit scale.

 

Science- 10 47


b.

Digital thermometer

These days the uses of clinical thermometer is

being replaced by digital thermometer

(clectronic thermometer). It has digital display 4
which contains temperature sensitive resistor \
as thermometric substance. Its working

principle is based on the variation of resistance

of a resistor with its temperature. Fig. 4.

   

Activity 4.3

Get a clinical thermometer from any nearby medical or any health service
centre. Discuss about its working principal. Measure your body temperature
along with other 5 friends and find the average temperature.

c

Laboratory thermometer

The thermometer which is used to

measure the temperature of various

objects is called laboratory

thermometer. It is used in the

course of different scientific

experiment and __ investigations. Fig. 4.5
Laboratory thermometer — can

measure how hot or cold a sample or environment is. The mercury is
used as thermometric liquid. It has thin walled bulb which is made larger
than the bore of the capillary tube. The larger size of the thermometer
whereas the sensitivity of the thermometer, whereas to show the exact
temperature and sensitivity the capillary is made shiny. Normally, it
contains Celsius scales and marked from -10°C to 100°C.

Maximum and Minimum Thermometer

The thermometer which is used to measure the maximum and minimum
temperature of a day is called maximum and minimum thermometer. It
has a U-shaped capillary tube which contains a mercury column and
alcohol above the mercury column. Steel index are inserted in the

Fig. 4.6
Science- 10 48

 


capillary tube on the either side of the thermometer, The relative
positions of the indices give the maximum and the minimum
temperature. The position of the indices can be reset using a magnet.

It is especially used by meteorologists.
Specific heat capacity

‘The heat energy is required to raise the temperature of a body. But different
amount of heat is required to change (increase or decrease) the temperature of
equal mass of different substances by 1°C. It is because heat capacity of
different substances is different. For example if equal mass of water and oil
are heated through 1°C, more heat energy is needed to raise the temperature
of water than oil. Thus, different quantity of heat is required to change the
temperature of equal mass of different substances.

Activity 4.4

Take two identical beakers of same
size and pour 500ml of water in any
of them and 500m! mustard oil in
another beaker. Set up the apparatus
as shown in the figure and measure
the temperature of the liquids in both
the beakers. Then heat them with
two spirit lamps of same power.
Note the temperature of both liquids
in every two minutes. Fig. 4.7

 

Out of these two liquids, whose temperature will rises faster? Why?

Though the same quantity of heat was given to both liquids, the temperature
of oil rises faster than that of water. This shows that different substances have
a property by virtue of which the same amount of heat supplied to them
causes difference in rise of temperature. As we know that substances are made
of molecules and the nature of molecules varies according to the substances.
The kinetic energy of the molecules of different substances is different even
though the same quantity of heat is supplied to them. This results the different
heat capacity of different substances,

The specific heat capacity of a substance is the amount of heat required to
raise the temperature of 1kg of a substance through 1 'C.

It has been experimentally proved that 4200 joules of heat energy is required
to raise the temperature of Ikg of water through 1'' C. Hence, the specific heat
capacity of water is 4200J/kg °C.

Science- 10 49

 

Stand,


The SI unit of specific heat capacity is J/ kg 1) C and CGS unit is calorie/gm
be

Specific heat capacity determines the heat absorbing capacity of a substance.
A body having high specific capacity can absorb or lose more amount of heat
but a substance having less specific heat capacity can absorb or lose less
amount of heat quickly.

   

The specific heat capacities of some substances are given below.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

S.No | Substances Specific Heat Capacity (J/ kg’ C)
1 Lead 130
2 Mercury 140
3 Silver 234
4 Brass. 380
5 Copper 400
6 Steel 447
7 Tron 460
8 Aluminum 900
9 Glass 670
10 Kerosene 2200
ll Tce 2100
12 Alcohol 2400
13 Water 4200
14 Petrol 1670
15 Sand 800
16 Vegetable Oil 2000

 

 

 

 

The above table shows that the specific heat capacity of water is the highest.
The greater the specific heat capacity of a substance, the greater is the heat
required to raise the temperature. So, water is used as a heating as well as a
cooling agent.

Science- 10 50


Heat Equation

During the thermal contact, quantity of heat lost by a hot body is always equal
to the quantity of heat gained by another body if heat lost by radiation is
neglected. It is based on the law of conservation of energy.

So, Heat lost = Heat gained
Heat lost or gained by a body is directly proportional to its mass, if change in
temperature is kept constant Le. Q am. .@

Again, the quantity of heat lost or gained by a body is directly proportional to
its temperature difference if mass is constant.

 

 

From relation (i) and (ii), we get
Qamdt
Q=msdt

Where 's' is proportionality constant and also known as the specific heat
capacity of the body.

This equation is called heat equation. Therefore, heat equation states that the
quantity of heat lost or gained by a body is equal to the product of mass,
specific heat capacity and temperature difference of the body.

Example 1

Calculate the amount of heat supplied if 500gm of water is heated from
5°C to 30°C.

Solution, Here,
Mass of water (m) = 500gm = 500/1000 =0.5kg
Change in temperature (dt) = 30°C - 5°C = 25°C
Specific heat capacity of water (s) = 4200 J/kg °C
Amount of heat required (Q) =?
Now, we have,
Q msdt

= 0.5 x 4200 x 25 = 52500 J

= 5.25 x 10°)

Science- 10 51


Hence, it needs 5.25 x 10° J heat energy.
Example 2

If 1.6 x 105 J of heat energy is supplied to 10kg of sand to increase its
temperature from 14°C to 34°C. Calculate its specific heat capacity.

Solution; Here,
Amount of heat required (Q) = 1.6 x 10°J

Mass of sand (m) = 10kg

Initial temperature (t)) = 14°C

Final temperature (t2) = 34°C

Change in temperature (dt) = t — ti = 34°C - 14°C= 20°C
Specific heat capacity of sand (s) =?

Now, we have,

Q =msdt

=2

mat
__1.6x105
10x20

 

= 800 Wkg°C
Thus, the specific heat capacity of sand is 800 J/kg°C.
Example 3

If 10kg of water at 45°C is mixed with 20kg of water at 10°C to take a
bath in the winter, find the final temperature of the mixture.

Solution, Here,

Mass of warm water (m;)= 10kg
Mass of cold water (m2)= 20kg
Temperature of warm water (t1) = 45°C
Temperature of cold water (t2) = 10°C
Final temperature of the mixture (

We have,

 

Heat lost = Heat gain
or, mys; (45-t) = mos (t-10)
or, 10 x 4200 (45-t) = 20 x 4200 (t— 10)

Science- 10 52


or, 45 —t= 2t— 20

or 3t= 65

65

3

t=21.66°C

Thus, the temperature of mixture is 21.66°C.

or,t

 

Summary

1. Heat is the sum of kinetic energy of molecules of a body and temperature
arises due to increase in average kinetic energy of these molecules.

2. The mass and temperature of a body determine the amount of heat in it.

3. Temperature can be measured with different scales such as Celsius,
Fahrenheit and Kelvin.

4. Heat is measured by a calorimeter and temperature is measured by a
thermometer.

5. A thermometer works on the principle of thermal expansion.
6. Liquid used in a thermometer can either be alcohol or mercury.

7. The amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 kg of a
substance by 1°C is called specific heat capacity.

8. Due to high specific heat capacity of water it is widely used for heating as
well as cooling purposes.

9. The quantity of heat lost or gained by a body is equal to the product of
mass, specific heat capacity and temperature differences of the body. icc.
Q=msdt.

Science- 10 53


 

Cidss

 

A. Choose the best alternatives.
1. How many joules make one calorie?
(a) 8.25 (b) 4.25
(c) 10005 (4) 42005
2. What are the boiling point of mercury and alcohol?
(a) 357°C and 78°C (b) -39°C and -115°C
(c) 100°C and 120°C (d) 90°F and 100°F

3. What is the sum of kinetic energy of the molecules of a system called?

(a) heat (b) temperature

(c) specific heat capacity (@) heat equation
4. Which of the following is the specific heat capacity of water?

(a) 2003/kg°C (b) 4000 Jike°C

(c) 4200S/kg°C (d) 820I/kg°C
5. What is the melting point of water in Fahrenheit scale?

(a) 100°F (b) 0°F (c) 373°F (d) 32°F
6. What is our normal body temperature?

(a) 98.6 °F (b) 35°C (d) 100°C (e) 273K

B. Answer the following questions.

1. Define heat on the basis of kinetic theory of molecules. List out
three differences between heat and temperature.

2. On which factor does quantity of heat depend? What is the effect on
the molecules of matter when the temperature is varied?

 

 

3. What is thermometric liquid? On which principle is a thermometer
based?

4. Write down the advantages and disadvantages of the mercury
thermometer.

5. Describe the structure and function of the maximum-minimum
thermometer.

Science- 10 54


6. Define specific heat capacity, What are the specific heat capacities
of water and copper?

7. When equal mass of hot water and oil at the same temperature are
allowed to cool, water cools slower than the oil. Why?

8. What is heat equation? On which four factors does the quantity of
heat lost or gained by a body depend?

9. Study the following table and answer the questions, below.

 

 

Substances Specific heat capacity (J/kg’C)
A 1000
B 450
Cc 780

 

 

 

 

If equal amount of heat is supplied to equal masses of all these
substances at same temperature, which one will have the lowest
temperature? Why?

ii, Which one of them is suitable for cooling and heating purpose? Why?

iii. Which one will penetrate to the maximum depth when equal mass of
these substances are heated to make their final temperature 100°C and
then kept on a wax slab of uniform thickness? Why?

iv. What do you mean by specific heat capacity of Bis
450 J/ke°C?

C. Solve the following numerical problems.

1. What amount of heat is required to raise the temperature of 5 kg of

water through 20°C? (4.2x 10°)
2. How much heat is required to raise the temperature of 150 gm of a iron

ball from 25°C to 15°C? ( specific heat capacity of iron is

480J/kg°C) (9000J)

3. When 456 KJ of heat is supplied to a copper ball of mass 2 Kg at 30°C,
its final temperature is found to be 600°C. Calculate its specific heat
capacity. (400I/kg’C)

4. When 2 Kg of water is heated by an electric heater of 1 KW for some
time, it supplies 84 KJ of heat. If the specific heat capacity of water is
4200 J/Kg’C, calculate its change in temperature. a0’o)

Science- 10 55


5. If an electric heater of 3 KW used to heat 100 Kg of water at 30°C and it
supplies 3.6 x 10° J of heat energy, calculate the final temperature of
water. 38.570)

6. 80 KJ of heat is supplied to an object of mass 4 Kg at 30°C. If its
specific heat capacity is 1000J/Kg°C, what will be the final temperature?

60°C)
7. 10 Kg of water at 90°C is cooled by mixing 20kg of water at 20°C. What
is the final temperature of the mixture? 38.570)

Project Work

Take a clinical thermometer and measure the body temperature of your
friends and family members. Note their body temperature and find its average.

Glossary

Kinetic molecular theory: the theory which explains the physical properties
of matter in terms of the motion of its constituent
particles

Thermal equilibrium: —_ condition at which two substances in contact are
at same temperature

Thermal expansion: tendency of matter to change its dimension in
response to temperature

Science- 10 56


uot LIGHT

How do we see objects around us during day but unable to see them at night?
What is the type of energy that makes objects visible? Do you have any friends or
family members who use spectacles? Do you know any specific reason behind the
use of spectacles? Let’s have discussion,

Light makes all the objects around us visible. Light is a form of energy which
gives us the sensation of vision. Light itself is invisible but it makes objects
visible. As the light coming from its source strike on the objects, it gets reflected
When these reflected rays reach to the retina of our eye, its image is formed on the
retina, Image thus formed reaches to our brain through optical nerve and objects
become visible. If the eyes have defect then the image can’t be formed on the
retina, To overcome this problem, a lens of suitable power is used which we
commonly called spectacles.

In our daily life, we use different types of optical instruments. All these
instruments are provided with lenses. In this chapter, we are going to study about
lens, phenomenon of refraction of light by lens and defects of vision.

Lens

Have you ever used binoculars to see distant objects? Have you noticed the lens
used in mobile and watch repair centre to see their minute parts clearly? What do
these instruments have? These instruments have lens. It is an useful device used in
various optical instruments. A lens is a piece of transparent glass bounded by two
refracting surfaces which are usually spherical in shape. It is usually made up of
glass. Spherical lenses can be classified into two types : convex lens and concave
Tens.

Convex lens

The lens which is thick at the middle and thin at the edge is called convex lens. It
converges a parallel beam of light at a point after refracting through it. That's why
it is called converging lens. Depending upon the position of the objects it can
produce real as well as virtual images. It can also produce magnified as well as
diminished images. Biconvex, plano-convex, concavo convex are the types of
convex lens. There is biconvex lens in human eyes.

Science- 10 57


Fig. 5.1: Converging lens

Concave lens: The lens which is thin at the middle and thick at the edges is called
concave lens. It diverges the parallel beam of light after refracting through it
That's why it is called diverging lens. This lens always produces virtual and
diminished image. Biconcave, plano concave, canvexo concave are the types of
concave lens.

 

Fig. 5.2: Diverging lens

Lens as a group of prisms

A lens is supposed to be made up of combination of many prisms. A convex
lens is also made up of a set of prisms in such a way that the prisms in the
upper half have their bases downwards and the prisms in the lower half have
their bases upwards. The central parts

of the lens are just like a thick glass

slab as in figure 5.3. The rays of light

after refracting through the lens

always bend towards its base. So the E
prism in the upper part of the lens

bends the incident ray downward,

while the prism in the lower part of

the lens bends the incident ray — Convexlens Fig. 53

Science- 10 58


upwards. The central part of the lens, which is just like a rectangular glass
slab. So the light passes through it without deviation. That’s why a convex
lens converses the rays of light after refraction.

Similarly, a concave lens is also made by
the combination of prisms in such a way awa
that the prisms in the upper half have

their bases upwards and the prisms in the

lower half have their bases downwards.

The central part of the lens is thick glass

slab as in figure 5.5. The ray of light after A
refracting through the lens always bent ¢hcve tn:

toward the base. So the prism in the

upper part of the lens bends the incident ray upward, while the prism in the
lower part of the lens bends the incident ray downwards. The central part of
the lens, which is just like a rectangular glass slab, so the light passes through
it without deviation. Thus, a concave lens diverges the rays of light after
refraction.

Fig. 5.4

Some terms related to lens

Different specific terms are used while discussing about the function of lenses.
Centre of curvature, principal axis, optical center, principal focus, focal length are
such important terms and are defined as follow.

Center of curvature

The centre of the sphere of which the lens is a part is called centre of curvature.
There are two spherical surfaces in the lens. So, there are two centres of curvature
Cy and Cy as shown in figure.

 

  

Principal axis

The line joining both the centers of curvature of a lens is called the principal
axis, In both of the above figures, XY represents the principal axis.

Science- 10 59


Optical centre

The geometrical centre of a lens is known as its optical centre. In the given
figure, the point O represents the optical centre. A ray of light passing through
it remains undeviated.

Principal focus or focus

Principal focus is the point on the principal axis where the rays of light
parallel to the principal axis converge after refraction through a convex lens or
appears to diverge from a point on the principal axis through a concave lens.
In the figure, the point F represents the focus.

Focal length

The distance between the
optical centre (O) and the
principal focus (F) of a
lens is called its focal
length. It is denoted by
letter 'f. Focal length of
a lens depends on its
thickness. A thick lens
has shorter focal length than a thin lens. In diagram, the distance between O and F
is focal length.

 

 

Activity 5.1 Method of determining focal length of a convex lens

Hold convex lens and keep it in front of distant objects like tree, house ete. Then
put a paper behind the lens. Make to face the rays of light from the distant object
on the paper. Now shift the lens towards or a way from the paper until clear
inverted image of distant object is obtained. Measure the distance between the
lens and paper. Then you will get the focal length of that lens.

When parallel rays from the distance object incident as a convex lens, it produces
image on its focus after refraction. This fact is used while determining the focal
length of a convex lens. In this process, paper is shifted towards and way from the
lens to produce clear image on the paper. The process of adjusting distance
between the lens and the screen to produce clear image on the screen is called
focusing. Focusing is necessary to get clear and distinct image from any optical
instruments.

Science- 10 60


Rule of refraction through lens

1. The ray parallel to the principal axis passes through the principal focus after
refracting through the lens.

2. The ray passing through the optical centre does not deviate.

3. The incident ray passing through the principal focus becomes parallel to the
principal axis after refraction through the lens.

Convex lens Convex lens

 

Concave lens Concave lens
Fig. 5.7
Image formed by convex lens

The type of image formed by a convex lens depends on the position of the object
in front of the lens. They are given below with illustrative diagrams.

a. Object at infinity

 

Fig. 5.8

Science- 10 61


When an object is placed at infinity in front of the convex lens, the image is
formed at focus (F) on the other side of the lens. The image thus formed is
real, inverted and highly diminished.

b. Object beyond 2F

 

Fig. 5.9

When an object is placed beyond 2F of a convex lens, its image is formed
between F and 2F on the another side of the lens. The image thus formed is
real, inverted and diminished.

c. Object at 2F

B Convex lens

   

 

 

Fig. 5.20

When an object is placed at 2F in front convex lens, its image gets formed at
2K on the anther side of the lens. The image thus formed is real, inverted and
same size as that of the object.

d. Object between 2F and F

 

Fig. 5.14

When an object is placed between 2F and F in front of convex lens, its image
is formed beyond 2F on the other side of the lens. The image thus formed is
real, inverted and magnified.

Science- 10 62


e. Object at F

 

Fig. 5.12 a
N

When an object is placed at F in front of convex lens, the image is formed at
infinity on the other side of the lens. The image thus formed is real, inverted
and highly magnified.

f. Object between F and O lens

   

Fig. 5.13

When an object is placed between O and F, its image is formed beyond the
object on the same side. The image thus formed is virtual, erect and
magnified.

From the above ray diagram, it is clear that as the object approaches the lens,
the image formed gradually moves away from the lens. It means as the object
is placed nearer to the lens, the size of image increases gradually,

Images formed by concave lens

A concave lens produces only one type of image i.e virtual. The image always lies
between the focus and the optical centre.

a. Object at infinity

  
 

When an object its placed at infinity, the
image is formed at focus on the same side of | Figcus Principal axis
the lens. The image thus formed is virtual,
erect and highly diminished.

Fig. 5.14

Science- 10 63


b. Object between infinity and optical Centre

When an object is at any place
between infinity and optical
centre, the image is formed
between focus and optical centre
on the same side of the object in
the lens. The image thus formed
is virtual, erect and diminished as
shown in figure.

   

Image

Fig. 5.15

Power of lens

The power of a lens is its ability to converge (in convex lens) or diverge (in
concave lens) the incident beam of light. The power is said to be positive if the
lens converges the rays and negative if it diverges. The ability of lens to converge
or diverge the incident beam of light is inversely proportional to its focal length.
Shorter the focal length, the greater is the convergence or divergence produced by
alens.

  

Mathematically, it is the reciprocal of its focal length expressed in meter.
P= ; (where f is expressed in meter)

The power of lens is measured in diopter (D). Diopter is also measured in radian
/meter.

Example 1

Find the power of a lens, having focal length of 25cm. Also identify what kind of
lens is it?

Solution
Focal length (f) = 25em = = =0.25em
Power of the lens (P) =?

We know that

Power of the lens (P) =;

+ =4D

"0.25

Thus, the power of the lens is 4D. Since the power of lens is positive so its convex
lens.

Science- 10 64


Example 2

Saru wears spectacle of power -2.5D, Calculate the focal length of her lens, Why
type of lens is she using?

Solution
Power of the lens (P) = -2.5 D
Focal length (f) =?
Now, we know that,
Power of the lens 1/£(m)
=1/-2.5
=-0.4m
=-40 cm
The focal length of the lens is 40 cm. And the negative sign indicates that the lens
is a concave lens.
Uses of lens
1, Lenses are used in spectacles for the remedy of defects of visions.
2. Lenses are used in various optical instruments like camera, telescope,
microscope etc.

3. A concave lens is used in making peeping hole in a door to see the person
beyond the door.

Magnification(M)

For the different positions of the objects, a lens can form images of various sizes.
This variation in the size of images formed by a lens can be explained in terms of
magnification.

 

 

Magnification of a lens is defined as ratio of size of the image to the size of the
object. It a denoted by m.
size of image (I)

Thus, m=
size of object (0)

Since it is the ratio of similar physical quantities, it does not have unit.
Magnification can also be calculated by using following formulae too.
height of image (1)

Magnification (m) ~ 5 ght of abject (0)

Science- 10 65


m=+
°

Magnification can also be calculates as

image distance (v)
object distance (u)

Magnification (m) =

Method of measuring magnification
In the alongside ray diagram, AO is
an object placed on the principal axis
of a convex lens beyond 2F. A ray *
AX is parallel to principal axis which
passes through F of the another side
of the lens after refraction. Another
ray AC passes through optical centre O and remains undeviated. Two rays AD
and BD meet at D to make the real image of object AO.

Then, inA OCA and A CID,

ZACO= ZDCI (being vertically opposite angles)

ZAOC= ZDIC=90°

ZOAC = ZIDC (remaining angles)

So, AOCA and A CID are similar triangles. Then

   

Fig. 5.16

cl _ ID
co” OA
Thus,

Image distance (v) __height of the image (1)
Object distance (u) _ height of the object (0)

image distance (V)

so, magnification
> mag object distance (u)

So, magnification can be calculated by measuring image distance and object
distance.
Human eye

Human eye is the natural optical instrument which produces real images. It
consists of flexible convex lens and it helps to see the objects around us. Since,
human eye is delicate organ so it is being protected inside the cavity of the skull.

Science- 10 66


The rays of the light from an object pass
through cornea, aqueous humour, pupil, lens, ( ane
vitreous humorous and then converge in retina
forming its image. The image formed on the
retina is real and inverted. Optical nerves carry
this information to the brain and brain inverts
and interprets the image. retina

Fig. 5.17

‘optic

 

Accommodation of eye

The process by which cilliary muscles function to change the focal length of the
eye lens so that the image formed on the retina becomes clear is called the
accommodation of the eye. It varies for near and distant objects and also for
moving away or towards the eye. By adjusting the focal length, the eye is actually
changing its lens power. Thus, the automatic ability of the lens of the eyes to
adjust its focal length to form the image of objects on retina is called
accommodation of eyes.

Range of vision

The power of accommodation possessed by an eye with normal vision is such that
it can clearly see the object placed anywhere between infinity and its near point.
The nearest point from the eyes at which an object can be seen clearly by the eyes
is called its near point. The near point of a normal eye is at a distance of 25cm
from the eye. It is the minimum distance for the eye beyond which an eye can
accommodate and focus object clearly. So, if an object is placed at a distance less
than 25cm from the normal eyes, the power of accommodation is not possible and
the image is formed beyond retina.

The farthest point from the eye at which an object can be seen clearly by the eye is
called the far point of the eye. For a normal eye, the far point is at infinity. Thus,
the distance between near point to far point which can be focused by our eyes is
called range of vision. The normal eyes can focus the objects lying inside the
range of vision.

Defects of vision

A normal eye can see clearly the objects lying anywhere between 25cm and
infinity from the eye. Thus, the image of an object lying anywhere between 25cm
and infinity is formed on the retina. An eye which fails to do so is said to be
defective. The eye which can’t see object placed at short distance or long distance
is said to have a defect of vision. Generally, there are two types of defect of vision
and they are categorised as

a. Short sightedness (Myopia) b. Long sightedness (Hypermetropia)

Science- 10 67


Short sightedness (Myopia)

The defect of vision in which a person can sec the nearby object but cannot see
the distant objects clearly is called myopia. For such person the farthest point is
nearer than infinity. So in this defect of vision, the image of the distant object is
formed in front of the retina. This defect of vision arises due to the following
cause.

© Due to the decrease in focal length of the eye lens or
© Duc to the elongation of eye ball.

Eyes suffering from myopia has eye lens thicker than the normal one. So the
image of distant objects form infront of retina. This type of defect of vision can be
corrected by wearing spectacles with concave lens of suitable power. Concave
lens diverges the parallel rays of light and help the lens of the eye to produce clear
image on the retina.

Concave lens

     

Image roma
distant abject

    

Fig. 5.18

Long sightedness (Hypermetropia)

The defect of vision in which a person can see distant objects but cannot see
nearby objects clearly is called hypermetropia. For such person near point moves
away beyond 25cm. So in this defect of vision, the image of the nearby object is
formed behind the retina. This defect of vision arises due to the following cause.

© Due to increase in focal length of eye lens or
* Due to shortening of eye ball.

Eyes suffering from hypermetropia has eye lens thinner than the normal. So the
image of distant objects get formed beyond of retina. This type of defect of vision
can be corrected by wearing spectacles with convex lens of suitable power.
Convex lens converges the parallel rays of light and help the lens of the eye to
produce clear image on the retina.

Convex lens
as Ret Retina
a ee Rimage
= Fig. 5.19

Science- 10 68

 


Summary

1.
2.

6.

Light is a form of energy that gives us the sensation of vision.

Lens is a piece of transparent glass bounded by two refracting surfaces which
are usually spherical in shape.

Concave lens is thin at middle and thick at edge while convex lens is thick at
middle and thin at edges.

A concave lens always produces virtual, erect and diminished image but
convex lens produces both real and virtual as well as diminished and
magnified images.

The magnification produced by a lens is defined as the ratio of size of image
to the size of object.

The converging and diverging capacity of a lens is called its power. Power of
lens is measured in Dioptre (D).

The ability of an eye to focus the image of objects at various distances on the
retina by changing the focal length of the eye lens is called accommodation
of eye.

 

The nearest point that can be focused clearly by the normal eye is called near
point.

Myopia is the defect of vision in which a person can see nearby objects but
cannot see the distant objects clearly.

. Hypermetropia is the defect of vision in which a person can see distant

objects but cannot see nearby objects clearly.

todo

A.
1.

Choose the best alternative.

Which type of lens is thicker at middle and thinner at edges?
(a) concave lens (b) convex lens

(c) plano convex (d) plano concave

The reciprocal of the focal length expressed in meter is called

(a) power of a lens (b) magnification

Science- 10 69


(c) accommodation (d) principal axis
3. The virtual image formed by a convex lens is always
(a) diminished (b) erect and magnified (c) inverted
(d) formed in opposite side of the object
4. Where is the image formed when object is at 2F of a convex lens?
(a) at 2F on the same side of object —_(b) at F on the next side of object
(c) at 2F on the another side of lens___(d) Between F and 2F

5. What is the nearest distance of distinct vision of a normal eye?

(a) 25cm (b)25km ——_(c) horizon (d) infinity
6. What is the focal length of lens with power + 1.0 D?

(a) 10m (b) Im (c) 10cm (d) 100m
7. Hypermetropia occurs due to

(a) elongation of the length of the eye ball
(b) eye lens become thick
(c) decrease of focal length of eye lens
(d) eye ball get shortened
B. Answer the following questions.
1. What is a lens? Mention its types with their uses.
Pictorially show the conversing and diverging function of lens.
How do you find out the focus of a lens?

State the rules of refractions of light through a convex lens.

vr wn

Write the type and nature of the image formed when an object is kept at
2F of a convex lens.

6. Define the term power of lens. Also write its unit.

7. Complete the given ray diagrams in your exercise book and also write
the type and nature of the image thus formed.

  

Science- 10 70


8. In which condition does a convex lens form an erect and enlarged image?
Give the application of this condition.

9. When an object is placed at 2cm far from the optical centre of a lens with
focal length 3cm., the image is formed in the same side of the object
which is erect, virtual and enlarged. If so,

i. what type of lens is it?
ii, draw the ray diagram.
10. What is far point? Write the normal range of vision of the human eyes.

11. What is myopia? Write its cause and remedy with the necessary ray
diagram.

12, What is hypermetropia? Write its cause and remedy with the necessary
ray diagram.

13. The diagram represents a type of defect of vision. Study it and answer
the following questions.

i. What type of defect of vision is it?

      
 

Tage Troma
distant object

ii. Mention the cause of this defect.

iii, What is the remedy of such defect of vision? Show it in a
diagram.

14, Saroja sees distant objects comfortably but she feels difficulty to see
near-by objects.

i. What kind of defect of vision is she suffering from?

ii, What is to be done to correct the defect of vision and why?
15. Define the following

(i) concave lens (ii) centre of curvature

(iii) focal length (iv) magnification

(vi) accommodation of human eyes

(vi) defect of vision (vii) range of vision

Science- 10 71


C. Differentiate between
1. Convex and concave lens
2. Object distance and image distance
3, Real and virtual image
4, Near and far point of human eyes
D. Explain with reason.
1. Concave lens is also known as diverging lens.

2. Patients suffering from short sightedness are suggested to use
concave lens.

E. Solve the following numerical problems.
1. Calculate the power of convex lens of focal length 20cm. (45D)

2. Calculate the focal length of a lens of power + 5 D. Name the type of
lens too. (0.2m, convex)

3. The power of a lens is 25D. If a person wants to read a book, how far
must the book be held from the lens? (4 cm)

4. A burning candle is placed at a distance of 15cm from a convex lens
with focal length of 20cm. Draw the ray diagram to show the formation
of image. Write the nature of the image. What is the power of that lens?

(SD)

Project work

Take some lenses of different thickness and try to find out the focal length of each
by focusing distant object on a sheet of paper. How is the thickness of lens related
to its focal length? Tabulate your result and draw conclusions.

Science- 10 2


Current Electricity

ems and Magnetism

Nowadays, current electricity has been regarded as the main source of energy. For
what purpose the electricity is being used? Which equipment can be run by using
electricity? Think how people are using electricity in their daily life. Today, in
this global world, use of electricity is being widen. Science and technology has
made the impossible things possible to happen. Electric appliances like fan,
television, computer, heater, washing machine, etc. are operated using electricity.
Current Electricity is transformed into different forms of energy which help to
perform different tasks. Electroplating of gold and silver is also done by using
electricity. It is also used to run industries.

In this chapter we will study about electricity, its effects, appliances used in our
daily life and consumption of electricity.

Effect of Current electricity

When electric current flows through a certain conductor the electric energy gets
transformed into various forms such as heat, light, sound, chemical, etc. The
transformation of electric energy into other forms is a result of effect of
electricity. Let's discuss some effects of electricity.

Heating effect

When electric current is passed through a conductor having high resistance, it gets
heated up. This affect is known as heating effect of electricity. The heat energy
produced in the conductor depends upon magnitude of electric current passed
through it, its resistance and time for which electricity flows through the
conductor. The conductor which converts electrical energy into heat energy is
called heating element. Nichrome is used as heating element in common practice.
It is an alloy of nickel (60%) and chromium (40%). It has very high resistance as
well as high melting point and it doesn’t react with oxygen of air even at higher
temperature about 900° C .So, it easily converts electrical energy into heat energy.

 

Electric heater, immersion rod, rice cooker, electric iron, electric kettle are some
examples of electric appliances based on heating effect of electricity.

Science- 10 B


 

Iron Heater Imersion heater Electric ketle

Lighting effect

When current is passed through a wire of high resistance, it becomes extremely
hot and produces light. This effect is called lighting effect of electric current. Such
effect of current is used for glowing electric lamps. The devices which are used to
convert electrical energy into light and heat energy are called lighting devices.

  

Filament lamp

An electric lamp in which filament is used to
convert electrical energy into light energy is called
filament lamp. It consists of a coil made up of thin a
wire enclosed in a glass bulb with inert gases like Nuopen a,
argon, neon or nitrogen which is connected to ate
terminal made up of lead via thick wire as shown in sgnngue_|-___/,
the figure. When current passes through the stare
filament, it becomes very hot (nearly up to 2900°C)

due to its high resistance. As the filament becomes

white hot due to high temperature, it emits visible

light.

The filament is generally made up of tungsten metal. It has high resistivity and
high melting point about 3400°C. When the filament comes in contact with
oxygen at high temperature; it gets destroyed due to oxidation. Therefore, inert or
inactive gas such as argon, neon or nitrogen is filled in the filament lamp.

 

The filament lamp emits more heat than light energy. It connects only about 10 %
of the electrical energy into light energy and remaining 90% is wasted as heat
energy. The average life span of filament lamp is about 1000 hours.

Fluorescent lamp

   

A fluorescent lamp is a device which converts electrical
energy into light energy with the help of mercury vapor
and fluorescent powder. It consists of a long cylindrical

tube which contains fluorescent power coated in its Eicon
Fluorescent amp

Tubeleht stare)
ucrecent Pouce” AC 220 v
ao

 

Science- 10 74


inner wall. Two electrodes are fixed at the ends and is sealed with mercury vapor
at low pressure. The electrodes are provided with two external leads for
connecting to power supply. When current flows through electrodes, electrons
flow from one electrode to another electrode through mercury vapour and the
mercury atoms collide with electrons. Then it produces invisible ultra-violet rays.
When the ultra-violet rays fall on the fluorescent power coated on the inner walls
of glass tube, visible light is emitted. The color of light thus emitted can be
changed by changing the colour of fluorescent powder.

A fluorescent lamp is much efficient than a filament lamp. It converts about 30%
of electric energy into light energy and about 70% into heat energy. It is more
durable as its life span is about 3000 hours.

Do you know?

Compact fluorescent lamp (CFL) is more efficient than simple fluorescent lamp. It
can convert 90% of electrical energy into light.

LED
ALLED lamp is a light emitting diode which is assembled into a lamp (light bulb)
for the uses of lighting fixtures. LED lamps have a life span and electrical
efficiency which are several times greater than ordinary lamps and are
significantly more efficient than fluorescent lamps.

LEDs have many advantages over incandescent light sources, including lower
energy consumption, longer life, improved physical robustness, smaller size and
faster switching. Light emitting diodes (IED) are used in the applications like
automotive headlamps, adverting, general lighting, traffic signals, camera flashes
etc. It converts 90% of electrical energy into light.

Electromagnetic appliances and their uses

Hans Christian Oersted discovered the
magnetic effect of current in the year 1819.
He observed the deflection of magnetic
needle of compass when it was bought near Raa
a current carrying wire. aligator clipe

    

When an electric current is passed through a wire, a magnetic field is produced
around it. This is known as magnetic effect of current. Its application is very
popular day by day as it is applied in various electronic appliances like
microphone, loud speaker, radio and television.

Science- 10 75


Electric Bell

An electric bell is a device which converts electric
energy into the sound energy. It consists of a U-shaped
soft iron core around which an insulated wire is wound.
A soft iron plate is adjusted in front of the
electromagnet. The flexible plate is connected with
hammer, It also bears a sound producing gong.

When the switch is put on, iron bar acquires a
temporary magnetism and the flexible plate of magnetic
material is attracted towards it due to which the
hammer hits the gong and the bell rings. As the plate
moves toward the magnet, the circuit breaks. So, the
iron core losses its magnetic property and the plate
returns to the original position and again the circuit
becomes closed and the same process repeats, Due to this repeated action, bell
rings continuously.

 

It is used as doorbell at home, as indicator in school and office etc.
Electro Magnetic Induction

In the figure alongside, ‘N’ and ‘S’

(ie. north and south) are two poles of vedo
a magnet. The direction of magnetic NO
lines of force passing from the North
Pole (N )to the South Pole (S) of the
magnet is represented by arrows.
When the conducting wire AB held
normal to the magnetic field, is

       

moved up and down crossing the Bh an.
magnetic lines of force, current gets Magnetic Vani
produced in the conductor. The -

current so produced is called ‘induced current’ and the process is known as
‘electromagnetic induction’, This process was discovered for the first time in 1831
A.D. by Michael Faraday.

During this process, two opposite i.e. positive and negative charges get developed
at the two ends of the wire. Then, the electrons flow through the wire producing
induced current that causes deflection in the needle of galvanometer connected as
shown in the figure. Galvanometer is a device used for detecting a small
magnitude of electric current.

 

Science- 10 76


Bicycle Dynamo

 

A very small and simple dynamo is used in
bicycle to light its bulb. It works on the principle
that a moving magnet near a wire in a circuit
induces an electric current. It is made up of a coil i
of insulated wire, permanent bar magnet, driving — wheelot bicycle
wheel, etc.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A powerful permanent magnet is kept closer to a coil whereas the driving wheel is
kept in contact with the bicycle wheel. When wheel of the bicycle rotates the
driving wheel along with bar magnet spins with high speed. This coil cuts the
magnetic lines of force and finally produces current in the coil which helps to
glow the bulb kept in the handle of the bicycle.

Activity 6.2

Take a bicycle with dynamo, and adjust the dynamo such that its upper part
touches the tyre. Keep the cycle in stationary position with its stand and start
rotating its paddle in slow motion and then fast motion? Observe the brightness of
bulb of the cycle.

i. What difference do you observe in the brightness of light when the paddle is
rotated faster?

ii, What is to be done to increase the rate of flow of current?
Activity 6.3

Take a matchbox and coil insulated copper wire

     
       
 

 

  

around its cover to make about 50 turns, And 4[S-Sy=—— Magnet
put a bar magnet inside the box as shown in the =— Match box
figure. Connect a galvanometer and move the [4

bar magnet in and outside of the box. Observe NEA Def wire
the deflection. Also observe what happen when V2

the magnet is inserted into the coil and kept KE

stationary. Now increase the speed of magnet 2

inside the coil and observe the result. Se

. Galvanometer
i, How does the needle of the galvanometer

deflect?

ii. Does the needle deflect in the same direction as before even after the magnet
is moved out?

iii, Why does the needle of the galvanometer deflect as the magnet is moved in
and out?

Science- 10 7


Generator:

Generator is a device which is used to produce electricity in a large scale. An
electromagnet is used in a generator
instead of using a permanent magnet. In
generator, turbine is rotated with greater
speed by using external force. The rotor
fixed with the electromagnet rotates along
with the turbine. As a result current is --
induced in the coil due to the change in
the magnetic flux linked to the coil.

  

“\

- AC Voltage

The magnitude of the current generated by a dynamo or a generator can be
increased by the following methods.

i. By increasing the number of turns of the coil
ii, By using magnet with strong magnetic field
iii, By increasing the speed of rotation of the coil
iv. By reducing the distance between magnet and the coil
Electric Motor

An clectrie motor is a device which converts vyis TN test
electrical energy into mechanical energy. An electric
motor brings rotational motion in the domestic
appliances such as electric fans, washing machines,

ee otric ° Brushes
mixtures, grinders, electric water pump, etc. Sus

. . . ae
It is based on the principle that when current carrying Sommister
conductor is placed in a magnetic field, it experiences

: eS eect
a force. As a result the conductor comes into motion, current
It consists of a coil placed between two poles of a
strong magnet. When current is passed through the coil, a magnetic field is set up
around it which interacts with the magnetic field of the magnet. As a result, the
coil experiences a force due to which it begins to rotate.

     
 

Commutator

Electric appliances and their uses
Inverter

The term inverter was first introduced by
David Chandler Prince in 1925 AD.
Inverter is an electric device which
converts alternating current (a.c) into
direct current (d.c). It contains a special

 

Science- 10 78


device called diod which lets the current flow in only one direction. Inverter
converts direct current (d.c) into alternating current (a.c). It usually comes with
battery which stores electrical energy so that it can be used when there is no
power supply.

Charger

The electrical device which is used to charge rechargeable battery is called a
charger. Some of the devices come with inbuilt battery. One end of the charger is
connected to the battery or the device with battery and another end is connected to
the supply of the current. As electric current is passed into the device, the battery
gets charged. The device has its own cut off system. Due to this system, the
charging of the battery stops itself when the battery is fully charged. It is used to
charge mobile, emergency light, radio etc.

Adapter

An AC adapter is a small power supply that changes household voltage of
alternating current (AC) in to low voltage DC, making suitable for the electronic
devices. Adapter allows one hardware or electronic interface. It is used to run
radio and other electrical appliances that need low voltage.

Solar Cell

Solar cell is a device that converts light energy directly into the electrical energy
by the voltaic effect. A solar cell, previously called solar battery is an example of
a photovoltaic device. A photovoltaic device is a device that generates voltage
when exposed to light. It was discovered by Alexander Edmond Becquerel in
1839.

Solar module is the major component used to convert sunlight into electricity.
Conductors and the most semi conductors are used in it. The common semi —
conductor used is silicon crystal, which is laminated into n-type and p-type layers.
These layers are kept one after another. When light strikes these crystals, it
induces “photovoltaic effect” and electricity is produced. The electricity so
produced can be used immediately or it can also be stored in a battery.

Working Mechanism of Solar Cells

1. Photons in sunlight stroked on the solar panel are absorbed by the semi-
conductors used (silicon).

2. With the collision of photon, electrons in the semi-conductors get excited from
their atomic orbital.

3. Excited electrons release energy to return to their original orbital, During the
process current is captured by electrode.

Science- 10 79


4. Solar cell converts solar energy into a Direct Current (DC).

5. An inverter can convert the DC into Alternating Current (AC).

Direct Current (DC) and Alternating Current (AC)

The electric current in which polarity/direction and magnitude do not change
periodically is called direct current. It is produced by cells or battery.

Magnitude
Magnitude

Time Time

Alternating Current Direct Current

The electric current in which polarity/direction and magnitude change periodically
is called alternating current (AC). For example, the frequency of the alternating
current distributed in Kathmandu is 50Hz. It means polarity of current in
Kathmandu changes /alternates at the rate of 50 times per second. AC is produced
by generator and AC dynamo

Transformer

A transformer is an electric device which converts low a.c voltage to high a.c
voltage or vice-versa. It is based on the principle of mutual induction i.e. when an
alternating current is passed in one coil and induced current is produced in the
neighboring coil. The coil in which a.c current is fed is known as primary coil and
the voltage supplied to the primary coil is called primary voltage. The coil of the
transformer from which electric current is trapped out is called a secondary coil.
The voltage of the secondary coil is called secondary voltage. The current
supplied to the transformer is called input current and the current drawn from the
secondary coil of the transformer is called output current.

A transformer consists of a laminated soft iron core made up of thin frames of soft
iron placed one above the another and insulated from each other by a chemical
called varnish or shellac. The lamination of the soft iron core is done to prevent
the loss of energy in the form of heat. There is an important relationship between
the ratio of the number of turns of primary coils and that of secondary coil with
the primary and secondary voltage.

Science- 10 80


Primary Voltage (V,) Number of turning in Primary Coil (Np)

 

 

Secondary Voltage (V,) Number of turning in secondary Coil (N,)
ie. Vp Np
Vv. Ny

There are two types of transformers.
i) Step up transformer

The transformer which converts low ac voltage in to high ac
voltage (ic. Vp<Vs) is called step up transformer. It has more
turns in secondary coil than that in primary coil (Np<Ns). It is
used in electric grids to save power during transmission through
overhead wires.

 

ii) Step down transformer

The transformer which converts high ac voltage to low ac
voltage (i.e. Vp>Vs) is called step down transformer. It has
less turns in secondary coil than that in the primary i.e.
Np2Ns. It is used in the house to step down the high voltage
current to low voltage up to 240V or 220V. It is also used in
electric appliances to get further smaller voltage.

s
8
g

 

Example 1:

The primary winding of a step down transformer has 770 turns and it is
supplied with 220V mains. The secondary winding produces 210V. Calculate
the number of turns in the secondary winding.

Solution
Primary Voltage (Vp) = 220V
Secondary Voltage (Vs)= 110V
Number of turning in primary coils (Np)=770
Number of turning in secondary coils (Ns)=?
Now, we have,
VP NP
vs NS
Npxvs
ve

770x210
220

or, Ns=
or, Ns=

Science- 10 81


 

is = 385 turns (approx.)
Hence, the number of tums in secondary coil of the transformer is 385 tums.
Example 2:

If the number of turns in the primary coil is thrice that in the secondary coil,
calculate the voltage across the secondary coil of transformer connected to a
supply of 330V.

Solution
Let, number of turns in secondary coil (Ns) = y
Number of tums in primary coil (Np) =3y

Primary Voltage (Vp) = 330V
2

 

 

Secondary Voltage (Vs)
Now, we have,
Vp _ Np
Vs Ns
330 _ 3y

r,
os oy

330
or, Vs ==

Vs=110V
Hence, the secondary voltage is 110V.
Safety measures in using electricity

Electricity plays a vital role in our life. It is one of the most important and
convenient source of energy at homes and industries. However, we daily come
across reports regarding hazards of electricity. Use of electricity can prove to be
very dangerous if certain precautions and safety measures are not observed in the
design of electrical devices and in handling out. The precautions that must be
considered while using electricity are mentioned below.

i) Use wires of high quality, proper amperage and having good insulating

material.

ii) Cover all naked wires and joints with insulating tape.
iii) All connections at plugs, switches, sockets must be tight

iv) Replace the defective plugs, switches and sockets.

Science- 10 82


v) Never touch any part of the circuit without putting on rubber shoes or rubber
gloves.

vi) Use fuse of proper rating and material.

vii) All electrical appliances must be properly earthed

viii) Connect switches and fuse to live wires.

ix) Put off the main switch in case of short circuiting and fire

x) Do not use water as fire extinguishers in case of fire due to electricity.

Electric power consumption

The knowledge regarding the calculation of power consumption in domestic
electrification is also equally important. The bill of power consumption in our
house should be paid regularly to the electricity authority in time. The electricity
consumed in house is known as kilowatt hour meter. Kilowatt hour is the unit of
power consumption. For the sake of simplicity, it is customarily called unit only.
In fact the power consumed per hour by an electric appliance of power one
kilowatt is called one kilowatt hour.

1 unit power consumption = | kilowatt hour
= 1 kw x Ihr = 1000watt x 60 x 60 se. = 3.6 x 10°J

Electricity consumption = Electricity power (kilowatt) x time (hour)

= power of electric appliance (P) x number of appliance (N) x time (t)

=PXNxt

‘Therefore, in order to calculate the consumption of electricity in our house, it is

required to know how many of the electric appliances (Electric bulb, heater, fan,

etc.) are operating, their total power and time in hours per day the appliances are

used. Since each appliance is operated in different periods of time, it is better to

calculate the unit consumed by these appliances separately. Let us study the
following example.

Example 3:

Ina house, if 12 tube lights of 40 W each are lit up 4 hours a day, 3 televisions
of 40 W each are turned on 4 hours per day, 2 irons of 750 W each are used 2
hours a week and 2 electric bulb of 200 W each are lit up 2 hours per day,
then calculate the electricity consumed per month. If it costs Rs. 7 for each
unit, then how much charge should be paid?

a) On lighting 12 tube each of 40 W, 4 hours per day

Science- 10 83


b)

°)

P=40W= > kw
N=12

t=4hr

Electricity consumed = ?
According to formula,

Electricity consumed per day =PxNxt

= RR = 1.92 Kwh
Unit consumed per month =1.92 x 30 = 57.6 kWh
3 Television of 40W, 4 hours per day
P=40 W= = Kw
N=3
t=4hr
Electricity consumed =?
According to formula,
Electricity consumed per day =PxNxt
= SG = 0.48 Kwh

Unit consumed per month =0.48 x 30 = 14.4 kWh
2 Electric Iron of 750 W, 2 hours weekly
P=750W = 2 kw
N=2
t=4 hr per week
Electricity consumed =?
According to formula,
Electricity consumed per week =P Nxt
= 750/1000 x 2 x 2
=3Kwh
Unit consumed per month = 3 x 4 = 12 kWh

Science- 10 84


d) 2 Bulbs each of 1000 W, 2 hours per day.

100

P=100W ==——=0.1 Kw
1000

N=2

t=2hr

Electricity consumed = ?

According to formula,

Electricity consumed per day = P x N x t
=0.1x 22
=0.4Kwh

Unit consumed per month 0.4 x 30 = 12 kWh

Thus, electric unit consumed per month = 57.6+14.4+12+12 Kwh = 96 Kwh = 96
units and the bill to be paid = 96 xRs. 7 = Rs. 672

Summary

1.

6.

The wire that converts electrical energy into heat energy is called heating
elements.

When electric current is passed through a high resistance wire, like nichrome
wire, the wire becomes very hot and produces heat. This is called heating
effect of current.

Tungsten is used as filament because it has got high resistance and high
melting point about 3400° C.

The average life of a filament lamp is about 1000 hours whereas that of a
fluorescent lamp is about 3000hours.

Fluorescent lamp produces light by producing the ultra violet rays and
changing it into visible light by the fluorescent power.

A generator or dynamo is a machine used for generating electric current by
converting mechanical energy into electrical energy.

The transformers are used either to increase the low voltage to high voltage
or to decrease high voltage to low voltage according to the required voltage.

The core a the transformer is laminated just to reduce the loss of input
current.

Science- 10 85


Electric shock is felt if a naked wire without sufficient insulation is touched
with our body.

. One kilowatt hour of electrical energy is the energy consumed by an_ electric

device of 1kW in one hour.

Exerci:

A.
Ll.

Choose the best alternatives.

What is the formula to calculate the consumption of electricity?

   

(a) P=IxV (b)P=*
m_ vi
(c)PxNxt @3=5
The relation to calculate the number of turns or voltage in the transformer is
= Np _ Ye
(a) n= NPT oOP=2
oy B= TS
@) Ns Vp
Which one is used as heating element in electric appliances?
(a) Chromium (b) Nickel
(c) Nichrome (d) Copper
Name the gas which is used in filament lamp.
(a) oxygen (b) nitrogen
(c) ammonia (a) hydrogen

Answer the following questions.

1. What is heating element? Name the heating element that is used in the
electric heater.

2. Mention any three differences between florescent lamp and filament
lamp.

3. Which element is used to make filament? Give two reasons.

4. List out the function of mercury vapor and fluorescent power in the
fluorescent lamp.

Science- 10 86


9.

Describe the working mechanism of electric bell with a labeled
diagram.

How is current electricity generated in the bicycle dynamo? Explain in
brief.

What steps should be taken to increase the amount of current produced a
generator?

The use of alternating current (ac) is limited without transformer. Justify
it.

What precautions should be made while handling electric appliances?

C. Differentiate between

1.

2.
3.
4.
D. E
1.
2.
3.
4.

Nichrome and Tungsten
Electric motor and Generator
Electricity obtained by cell and electricity obtained by dynamo

Step down and step up transformer

xplain with reason

Nichrome wire is used as a heating element.
A Filament lamp is dimmer than a fluorescent lamp of same power.
Inert gas is used in the filament lamp.

The core of transformer is laminated.

E. Solve the following numerical problems.

1.

‘A power transmission line feeds input power at 2400 V to a step down
transformer with the primary winding of 2000 turns. What should be
the number of turns in the secondary coil to get output of 220V? | 184]

A transformer is of 220primary voltage and 1000 turns in the primary
coil. How many turns of secondary coil will be needed to produce 110 V
from that transformer? | 500]

Calculate the output voltage in a transformer if input voltage is 240V
and_ ratio of the number of turns in secondary to the primary coil is 3:2.
[ 160V]

The number of turns of the primary winding of a certain transformer is
150 times than that in the secondary winding. Calculate the input e.m.f
in the primary winding if the e.m.f generated in the secondary winding is
220V ac. [33 Kv]

Science- 10 87


5. An electric heater of 2HP is used to make hall warmer everyday for 2
hours, Find the number of unit consumed in 7 days.

[21 units]

6. Ten electric bulbs of 100 watt are used for 6 hours per day and 2 electric
heaters of 2 kW are used for 2 hours per day. Calculate the total
consumption of electricity for a day.

[14 units]

7. Ina house, an electric bulb of 60 watt is used for 15 hours and an
electric heater of 750 watt is used for 10 hours every day. Calculate the
cost of using the bulb and the heater for 30 days if the cost of 1 unit of
electricity is Rs. 7. [Rs. 1764]

Project Work
If possible visit a bicycle workshop where dynamos get repaired. Request the

mechanic to explore different parts of dynamo while in motion as well as in rest.

Glossary
incandescent: bright light from a heated filament or other part

robustness: the property of being strong and healthy in constitution
galvanometer: an instrument for detecting or measuring a small electric

current by movement of a magnetic needle or of a coil ina
magnetic field

Science- 10 88


unit7 Classification of Elements

Introduction

In the ancient times, there were very few elements so their individual study was possible
but with the development of science, more and more elements were discovered. We have
almost 118 elements till today so the task of studying them one by one has become very
difficult and time consuming. Therefore, the necessity of classifying them on the basis of
their similarities and dissimilarities were felt by the scientific community. The table so
formed by the arrangement of elements on the basis of their r and dissimilar
properties is called periodic table.

 

  

Several attempts were made by many scientists to classify the elements and make their
study systematic. Some of the scientists were Antoine Lavoisier, John Dalton, Johann
Dobereiner, John Newlands and Lothar Meyer. All of them have contributed to bring the
classification of elements in present condition. Among them, Dmitri Mendeleev, a
Russian scientist had done really comprehensive and illustrative work in the construction
of periodic table but with the passage of time, some demerits were found. So, Henry
Mosely came up with modem periodic table that has removed almost all the demerits of
Mendeleev’s periodic table.

Periodic table is one of the greatest discoveries of chemistry that made it possible to study
all the elements systematically.

Mendeleev’s periodic table

Dmitri Mendeleev studied the physical and chemical properties of all 63 elements known
at that time. He found out that the physical and chemical properties of the elements
change with increasing atomic weight but similar properties repeat at regular interval. On
the basis of this finding, he stated his periodic law that was termed as Mendeleev’s
periodic law. It states that the physical and chemical properties of elements are
periodic function of their atomic weights.

On the basis of this law, he arranged 63 clements of that time in the order of their
increasing atomic weights. He also kept in mind that the similar elements fall one below
another in the same group. In this way, similar elements falling in the same vertical
column are called group and dissimilar elements falling in the same horizontal rows are
called periods. The table so formed is called Mendeleev’s periodic table. There were eight
groups and seven periods in Mendeleev’ periodic table

While arranging the elements in periodic table some of the slots remain empty because
the elements that match the properties of those particular slot are yet to be discovered.

So to maintain the symmetry of the table he kept certain gaps and predicted their physical
and chemical properties on the basis of periodic law. The greatest achievement of
Mendeleev’s periodic law was that three of the elements predicted by Mendeleev were

Science- 10 89


discovered in his lifetime. These elements are scandium, gallium and germanium that
were named as Eka boron, Eka alumunium and Eka silicon respectively by Mendeleev.
The properties of these elements also match as those predicted by Mendeleev.

Table 1: a portion of Mendeleev’s Periodic Table

A portion of Mendeleev's Periodic Table
i ut Iv Vv vi vu

 

* Named by Mendeev 1. Eka - Aluminium
2. Eka - Boron
3. Eka - Silicon
4. Eka - Manganese

Merits of Mendeleey’s Periodic Table
1. Systematic study of elements

Mendeleev did the most comprehensive and illustrative job in the field of
classification of elements at that time, which helped in the scientific and systematic
study of all known 63 elements.

 

2. Gaps in the periodic table

While arranging the elements on the basis of increasing atomic weight, Mendeleev
had left some gaps in his periodic table because the elements whose properties match
with that particular slot were not discovered then. He predicted that those elements
would be discovered in future. He also determined their physical and chemical
properties. Three of those predicted elements have been discovered during his
lifetime. Those elements were scandium, gallium and germanium that were named as
Eka boron, Eka aluminium and Eka silicon respectively by Mendeleev.

Science- 10 90


3. Correction of wrong atomic weight

Mendeleev found atomic weight of some of the elements were doubtful during the
construction of the periodic table. Atomic weights of some of the elements didn’t
justify their position so he studied their atomic weight once again and found they
were wrong and had given the correct atomic weight. For example, the atomic weight
of beryllium (Be), caesium (Cs), uranium (U), gold (Au) and platinum (Pt) have been
corrected by Mendeleev.

Demerits of Mendeleev’s Periodic Table

1. Position of hydrogen

Hydrogen has properties such as having only one electron in its outermost shell and
tendency of donating one electron in order to form a positively charged ion. These
properties match to that of group T' while the properties such as existing in gaseous
state and tendency of gaining one electron in order to become stable by gaining
duplet state which resembles with that of group VII but Mendeleev placed hydrogen
in group I without any explanation. Thus the position of hydrogen is controversial in
Mendeleev’s periodic table.

2. Position of isotopes

Since Mendeleev has arranged the elements in the order of increasing atomic weights,
the isotopes of the same element should be kept in different groups since they have
different atomic weight. Isotopes are the atoms of the same clement with different
atomic weights due to difference in number of neutron present in their nucleus. For
example, hydrogen has three isotopes protium (atomic weight: 1), deuterium (atomic
weight: 2) and tritium (atomic weight: 3).

3. Anomalous pair

Though Mendeleev’s Periodic table is formed on the basis of increasing atomic
weight of elements, there are some instances where the elements with more atomic
weights are kept after the element with less atomic weight. For example, Co (58.9) is
placed before Ni (58.7) and Te (127.6) is placed before I (127.0).

4. Separation of similar elements and grouping of dissimilar elements

In Mendeleev’s periodic table, similar elements such as Au and Pt, Cu and Hg, Ag
and Ti are separated or are placed in different groups while the elements such as Cu,
Ag and Au with dissimilar properties are placed along with alkali metals (Li, Na, K)
in the group 'I'.

Modern Periodic Table

In 1913, Henry Mosely and his team studied the physical and chemical properties of
elements and found out the atomic number of an element determine the property of an
clement rather than its atomic weight. Then, he arranged the elements on the basis of
increasing atomic number and most of the anomalies of Mendeleev’s periodic table were
removed automatically. He proposed modern periodic law that states — “The physical

Science- 10 91


and chemical properties of the elements are the periodic function of their atomic
number.”

This way in modern periodic table, the elements having similar properties fall one after
another in the same vertical column called group. While elements having gradual change
in properties are kept one after another in the horizontal rows called periods. This way a
table was constructed by arranging the elements in the order of their increasing atomic
number, which is known as modern periodic table.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Modern Period Table

 

a
Pr

 

or
Ce

 

 

 

aman emer (57-71)
Acie elements (29103)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Science- 10 92


Modern periodic table has been very helpful in the correction of demerits of Mendeleev’s
periodic table, The defects of Mendeleev’s periodic table were corrected as given belo

 

1. Position of hydrogen
In modem periodic table also, hydrogen is placed in group I though it has properties
of group VII, but explanation was given that more properties of hydrogen match with
that of group I. However, the hydrogen placement is still controversial and not
explained satisfactorily.

2. Position of isotopes

Since the elements of modem periodic table are arranged on the basis of increasing
atomic number, isotopes of one element can be placed in one place as they have same
atomic number and different atomic weights.

3. Position of lanthanides and actinides

The lanthanides and actinides are placed at the bottom of the table in a separate block
(£) in order not to increase the width of the table unnecessarily.

4, Position of metals
Different types of alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, transition metals and coinage
metals are separately placed in different group so that their study becomes more
systematic and proper.

5. Correction in the wrong position of elements

The position of Cobalt before Nickel and Tellurium before Iodine are also corrected
automatically by arranging the elements in the order of increasing atomic number.

Position of elements in the periodic table

1. Position of hydrogen

Hydrogen has dual properties. It resembles both with groups IA and VIIA. It has one
electron in its outermost shell so it can donate one electron to form a +ve ion just like
that of alkali metals so it can be placed in the group IA while it exists in gaseous state
and can gain one electron in stable state so it can be placed in the group VITA, but in
modern periodic table hydrogen is placed in group IA because more of its characters
match with that of group IA elements.

2. Position of metals, non metals and metalloids

Metals are elements that donate electron to form positive ion and conduct heat and
electricity. Non- metals are the elements which gain electron and do not conduct heat
and electricity. Metalloids are elements, which have the characters of both metals and
non- metals, They are placed in between metals and non-metals,

In modern periodic table the position of metals, non-metals and metalloids is very
clear. As we move from left to right in a period, the metallic character decreases

Science- 10 93


while non metallic character increases. Therefore, the elements of group IA, IIA and
IIIA are mostly metals. IVA are metalloids and VA, VIA and VIIA are non-metals.

Group IA contains most reactive metals known as alkali metals such as Li, Na, K etc.
They form alkali when dissolved in water, group IIA contains alkaline earth metals,
for example, Be, Mg, Ca etc. They also form alkali when dissolved in water and
found in rocks of the earth. Group VIIA contains most reactive non-metals known as
halogens.

3. Position of lanthanides and actinides

The 14 elements from cerium (58) to lutetium (71) after lanthanum (57) are called
lanthanides. They are rare earth elements. The other 14 elements from thorium (90) to
Lawrencium (103) after actinium (89) are called actinides. They are radioactive
metals. They are placed in the f-block in the separate table below the main body of
periodic table due to their different properties. It is modified to avoid unnecessary
sidewise expansion of the periodic table.

4. Position of transition elements

A set of metallic elements occupying a central block (group IB to VII B and VII) in
the periodic table is called transition elements. They show variable valency and a
strong tendency to form co-ordinate compound and many of their compounds are
coloured. They are also called d-block elements since their valence electrons are
filled in d orbitals.

Activity 7.1

Make your own modern periodic table by using a chart paper or photocopy paper and
coloured pens. Use different coloured pen for metals, non-metal, metalloids, transition
metals, lanthanides and actinides. Show your periodic table to your teacher and paste it in
your classroom.

Groups and Periods in periodic table
Groups

The vertical columns of the periodic tables are called groups in modern
periodic table. There are total of 18 groups. Elements having similar
properties are placed in a group. Each of the group from I to VII are divided
into A and B subgroups. There are three columns of group VIII. There is
one zero group which includes inert or noble gases having valency zero.

Science- 10 94


Characteristics of groups

 

1. The electronic configuration of the elements in a group is similar and the

valance shell contains same number of electrons and consequently they | 14

 

have same valency and similar properties. li

 

2. The atomic size of elements increase down the group hence nuclear
attraction force decreases from top to bottom in a group. This causes | Na

 

loosing of electron easily due to weaker attraction force between nucleus
and valence electrons. Therefore, the electro positivity (tendency of | K

 

 

 

donating electrons) or metallic characters of the elements increases in a
group. While the electronegativity (tendency of gaining electrons) decreases down
the group since the nuclear attraction power decreases down the group, more
electrons cannot be attracted towards the valence shell.

Elements belonging to the group IA are called alkali metals, They have only one electron
in their outermost shell so they show their reactivity by losing one electron or they are
electropositive in nature. As we move down the group the atomic size increases and
nuclear attraction force decreases, the valence electrons are loosely held so donating
electrons becomes easier as we move down the group. So reactivity or the electro
positivity increases down the group.

 

 

K>Na>Li

Elements belonging to group VIIA are called halogens. They are the | VIA
most reactive non-metals and show their reactivity by gaining one
electron. They are electronegative and give electronegative ions | F
(anion), a

As we move down the group, atomic size of the elements increases,
nuclear attraction power decreases so electrons can be attracted with | Br
lesser energy as we move down the group. Hence, reactivity or
electronegativity of group VIIA elements decreases down the group | I
according to the order.

F>Cl>Br>1
Activity 7.2

Make the atomic model of Lithium, Sodium and Potassium with the help of different
coloured woolen threads and buttons. Show variation in distance of valence electron from
their nucleus and relate it with their reactivity.

Activity 7.3

Make the atomic model of Fluorine and Chlorine with the help of different coloured
woolen threads and buttons. Discuss with your friends about the distance of valence
electrons from their nucleus and relate it with their reactivity.

 

 

 

 

 

Science- 10 95


Periods

The horizontal rows of the periodic table are called periods. In modern periodic table,
there are seven periods. Elements having gradual change in properties are placed in a
iod. On the basis of number of elements present, periods of modem periodic table are
ded into four types.

 

1. Very short period - 1" period. It contains 2 elements.
Short periods - 2" and 3“ periods. They contain 8 elements.

Long periods - 4" and 5" periods. They contain 18 elements.

RYN

Very long periods - 6" and 7 periods. They contain 32 and 26 elements
respectively.

Characteristics of periods

1. The gradual change in electronic configuration of element in a period is observed.
The number of shell remains same but the number of valence electrons increases as
we move from left to right in a period. Therefore, the valency also changes as 1, 2, 3,
4, 3,2, 1, 0.as we move from left to right in a period.

2. The atomic size or radii of the elements decreases as we move from left to right in a
period since the increase in number of electrons adds to the same shell. With the
increase in atomic number, number of proton and neutron in the nucleus also increase
thereby increase in the electrostatic force of attraction. So the nuclear attraction
power increases from left to right in a period as the result, shells are held more tightly
towards nucleus hence atomic size decreases from left to right in a period. Due to
which, electropositivity (tendency of donating electron) decreases while
electronegativity (tendency of gaining electrons) increases. Or metallic characteristic
decreases and non-metallic characteristic increases as we move from left to right in a
period. A part of periodic table, period 3, is given below.

 

 

Groups TA TIA MA |IVA | VA VIA | VITA | Zero

 

Elements Na Mg Al Si P Ss cl Ar

 

Electronic

we | 281 | 2.8.2 [283 | 284 |285 | 286 | 28.7 | 2.8.8
configuration

 

Valency 1 2 3 4 3 2 1 0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In the table above, 3" period of modern periodic table is shown. As we can see, atomic
number of the elements increases from left to right in a period. The number of electrons
also increases although there is same number of shells. Thus, the number of protons also
increase which in turn increases nuclear attraction force. As the result, nuclear attraction
force increases and atomic size decreases. Hence, electro positivity or metallic characters

Science- 10 96


decreases from Na to Al i.e. group IA to IIIA. Si shows metalloids characters, i.e. group
IVA and non-metallic characters increases from P to Cl, ie. group VA to VIIA and Ar
shows inert behavior, i.e. group zero.

Electronic configuration of element on the basis of subshells

First, we have to know the number of subshells each of the shell has and the electrons that

can exist in each shell

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Shell Subshells Total electrons
K 8 2
L s|p 8
M s|p]d 18
N s|PJd|f 32

 

 

 

 

 

Number of electrons that may exist in each of subshell is given in the table below

 

 

 

 

 

Subshell | No. of electrons
s 2

Pp 6

d 10

f 14

 

 

 

Now, let's see the electronic configuration of elements on the basis of shell given in the

table below

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Electronic configuration
Atomic Name of the | On the basis of shell
° On the basis of subshell
K |L |M |N
1 Hydrogen 1 Is!
2 Helium 2 Is?
3 Lithium 2 /1 1s’, 2s!
Science- 10 97


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 Berylium 2 |2 Is’,

5 Boron 2 43 1s?,28°2p!

6 Carbon 2 |4

7 Nitrogen 2 |5

8 Oxygen 2 16 Is*, 2s°2p*

9 Fluorine 2 7 1s’, 2s°2p*

10 Neon 2 18 1s*, 2s*2p*

a Sodium 2 |8 |1 Is’, 2s?2p%, 3s!

12 Magnesium [2 ]8 |2 1s*, 2s°2p°, 38?

13 Aluminium 2 |8 |3 1s’, 2s°2p, 3s°3p!

14 Silicon 2 |8 |4 28?2p%, 35°3

15 Phosphorus 2 |8 |5 Is’, 28°2p*, 38°3p*

16 Sulphur 2 |8 |6

17 Chlorine 2 |8 |7 1s*.2s*.2p*3s*.3p*

18 Argon 2 |8 [8 1s’, 28°2p°, 3s°3p°

19 Potassium 2 {8 [8 1 s*, 2s°2p°, 35°3p%, 4s!
20 Calcium 2 8 Js f2 1s’, 2s’2p°, 38°3p', 4s”

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Blocks in periodic table

The elements in periodic table are placed in four different blocks on the basis of last
electron entering into valence subshell.

a,

s-block elements

When the last electron of an element enters into s-subshell, it is known as s-block
elements. The elements belonging to group IA and IIA are s-block elements.
They have 1 or 2 electrons in their outermost subshell so they are metallic
electropositive in nature.

p- block elements

Science- 10 98


When the last electron of an element enters into p-subshell, it is known as p-
block element. The elements belonging to IIIA, IVA, VA, VIA, VIIA, and zero
group are p-block elements. They have maximum 6 electrons in their outermost
subshell. They may be electropositive or electronegative. They are metals,
metalloids, non-metals and inert gases.

c. d-block elements

When the last electron of an element enters into d-subshell, it is known as d-block
elements. The elements belonging to group IB, IIB, IIIB, IVB, VB, VIB, VIIB
and VIII belong to d-bock. They are also known as transitional elements. They
are placed in between s and p blocks. They all are metals with high density, high
melting and boiling point with variable valency.

d. f-block elements

When the last electron of an clement enters f-subshell, it is known as f-block
element. It consists of two series. The first series of 14 elements are known as
lanthanides and second series of 14 elements are known as actinides. These
elements are placed separately at the bottom of the periodic table. They are also
known as inner transitional elements.

Activity 7.4

Study carefully about all the elements given in this chapter. Divide them into s, p, d and f
block. Write down in the given table in a chart paper and paste it in your classroom.

 

Science- 10 99


Summary

1

10.

1.

The table formed by the arrangement of elements on the basis of their similar and
dissimilar properties is called periodic table.

The Mendeleev's periodic law states that the physical and chemical properties of
elements are periodic function of their atomic weights.

 

The modem periodic law states that the physical and chemical properties of elements
are periodic function of their atomic number.

The vertical columns of the periodic tables are called groups in modern periodic
table.

The atomic size of elements increases down the group hence nuclear attraction force
decreases down the group, the electro positivity (tendency of donating electrons) or
metallic characters of the elements increases.

The horizontal rows of the periodic table are called periods.

‘The atomic size of the elements decreases as we move from left to right in a period,
electro positivity (tendency of donating electron) decreases while electronegativity
(tendency of gaining electrons) increases.

When the last electron of an element enters into s-subshell, it is known as s-block
element.

When the last electron of an element enters into p-subshell, it is known as p-block
element.

When the last electron of an element enters into d-subshell, it is known as d-block
element.

When the last electron of an element enters into f-subshell, it is known as f-block
element.

Science- 10 100


A.

1.

 

TCI

 

Select the best alternatives.

Which group does an element having electronic configuration 1s”, 2s’2p', 3s!
belong to ?

aA b. HA c.VA VIA

Which of the following group of elements belongs to group IIA?

a, Alkali metal b. Alkaline earth metal

c. Lanthanides d, Transition metal

Which of the following non-metal is most reactive ?

a.F b.Cl c. Br dl

Which of the following statement is correct for a group of a periodic table.
a, All elements have different valency

b. The atomic size decreases as we move down

c. The electropositivity increases down the group

d. The electronegativity increases down the group

Modem periodic table was formulated by :

a, Dobereiner b. Henry mosely

c. Mendeleev d. John Dalton
Answer the following questions

State Mendeleev’s periodic law. Write down two importance of Mendeleev’s periodic
table.

What are the demerits of Mendeleev’s periodic table? Explain in brief.
State modern periodic law. Write down the features of modern periodic table.
Differentiate between Mendeleev’s and modern periodic table.

2
3
4.
5. How are the defects of position of isotopes solved in modern periodic table?
6. Differentiate between group and period,

7. Differentiate between s-block and p-block elements.

8

What are transitional elements? How are these elements different from other
elements?

9. What are Lanthanides and Actinides?

10. A portion of periodic table is given below. Answer the questions on the basis of it

 

 

IA TIA ILA IVA VA VIA VIIA Zero
Na Mg Al Si P Ss cl Ar
2.8.1 2.8.2 2.8.3 2.8.4 2.8.5 2.8.6 2.8.7 2.8.8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Science- 10 101


Which period of modern periodic table is shown in the table?

ec .

What happens to atomic size when moving from left to right in this period?

cc. How does reactivity vary when moving from left to right in this period?

d. Identify the most reactive metal and most reactive non-metal and the metalloid in
this period.
1. Write the electronic configuration of Chlorine and Magnesium on the basis of
sub-shell and also write down their position in periodic table.
12. Give reasons:

a. The position of hydrogen is controversial in Mendeleev’s periodic table.

b. Potassium is more reactive than Sodium.
¢. Group IA elements are very reactive metals.
d. Fluorine is more reactive than Chlorine.

e. Group VIIA elements are very reactive non-metals.

m

Group zero elements are called inert gases.

g. Atomic size of elements decreases when moving from left to right in a
period.

12. Study the electronic configuration below and answer the question:

1s2, 28’2p°, 3s! 182, 2s°2p°, 3s°3p*
A B

i. Name A and B with their group in periodic table
ii, Which of them belongs to s-block and why?

Project work

Study and observe the modem periodic table given in your textbook. Make your own
modern periodic table, using different colours for metals, non-metals and metalloids and
present it in your class,

Glossary
Periodic function: occurring at regular intervals
Inert gases: the gases that do not take part in chemical reaction

Science- 10 102


units Chemical Reaction

We observe many changes that are taking place around us. Some of them are temporary
or reversible such as melting of ice, while some are permanent and irreversible such as
burning of wood, digestion of food, etc. and such change occur by the combination,
decomposition or displacement of molecules of the matter. This is called chemical
change. Chemical change is represented by chemical reaction.

Chemical reactions

The combination, decomposition or displacement of molecules of matter during
chemical change is called chemical reaction. Various conditions bring about these
changes. The chemical reactions are represented by chemical equation. The
compounds or elements that take part in chemical reaction are called reactant.
They are written at the left side of an arrow that represent a change while the
compound or elements that formed after the chemical change are called product.
They are written at the right side of the arrow.

Reactant ——» Product
Types of chemical reactions

Depending upon the reactants and the products formed after the chemical change,
chemical reactions are of four types. They are:

1. Combination reaction

 

When two or more reactants combine to form a single product, such chemical
reaction is called combination reaction. For example,

Sodium + Chlorine =——» Sodium Chloride
2Na+Cl; —* 2NaCl
Nitrogen + Hydrogen — Ammonia
N2 + 3H, —* 2NH3
Iron + Sulphur ——> Ferrous Sulphide
Fe+S ——> FeS
Carbon + Oxygen ___, — Carbondioxide

C+O, —» CO;

Science- 10 103


 

Aluminum + Nitrogen —__» Aluminum Nitride
2Al+N; ——> 2AIN

Magnesium + Oxygen — Magnesium Oxide

2Mg + 0; —» 2MgO

Decomposition reaction

When a single compound or reactant undergoes decomposit
more product, such chemical reaction is called decomposition reaction. For
example,

Calcium Carbonate ——> Calcium Oxide + Carbon dioxide

 

Caco; —> Ca0+CO,
Potassium Chlorate ——* Potassium Chloride + Oxygen

2KCIO; * 2KCI +30

electrolysis

Water ““"""" Hydrogen + Oxygen

Electrolysis
2H,0 ——> 2H)+0)
Lead Nitrate ——» Lead monoxide + Nitrogen dioxide + Oxygen
2Pb(NO;), ——®» 2PbO + 4NO +O,
Silver Oxide > Silver + Oxygen

2Ag,0 ——> 4Ag +02

Mn02
Hydrogen peroxide ——> Water + Oxygen

Mino
2H;0, ————> 2H;0 + 0)

Displacement reaction

When an atom or group of atoms in a molecule is replaced by another atom or
group of atoms, such chemical reaction is called displacement reaction.
Displacement reaction is of two types. They are:

Science- 10 104


a.

a. Single displacement reaction
b. Double displacement reaction

Single displacement reaction
When an atom in a molecule is replaced by another atom, such chemical
reaction is called single displacement reaction. For example,

Zinc + Hydrochloric acid > Zinc Chloride + Hydrogen
Zn+2HCl ——> ZnCh + Hp

Here, zine replaces hydrogen from molecules of hydrochloric acid.
Chlorine + Potassium Bromide— Potassium Chloride + Bromine

Ch + 2KBr —* 2KCl+Bnf

Here, chlorine being more reactive replaces bromine from potassium bromide.
Magnesium + Sulphuric acid —> Magnesium Sulphate + Hydrogen

Mg+HSO, ——» MgSO,+ Ht

Here, magnesium replaces hydrogen from sulphuric acid.
Iron + Copper Sulphate — Zinc Sulphate + Copper

Fe + CuSO, ——> FeSOQ4+ Cu}

Here, iron replaces copper from copper sulphate.
Copper + Silver Chloride — Cupric Chloride + Silver

Cu+2AgCl ——» CuCh+2Ag |

Here, copper replaces silver from silver chloride.

. Double displacement reaction

When there is a mutual exchange of atom or group of atoms having similar
charges between two reacting molecules, the chemical reaction is called
double displacement reaction. For example,

Silver Nitrate + Sodium Chloride — Sodium Nitrate + Silver Chloride

AgNO; + NaCl ——» NaNO; + AgCl

Science- 10 105


Or

Ag’NOy +Na‘Cl ——» Na‘NOy + Ag'Cr

Here, exchange of ions having similar charge take place.

Mercurie Chloride + Potassium Iodide — Potassium Chloride + Mercuric Iodide
HgCh + 2KI — > 2KCl+Hgb

Calcium Chloride + Sodium Carbonate — Calcium Carbonate + Sodium Chloride
CaCl, +Na,CO; ——> CaCO; +2NaCl

Magnesium Nitride + Water + Magnesium Oxide + Ammonia

MgsN; + 3Hx30—* 3MgO + 2NH3

Calcium Chloride + Silver Nitrate + Calcium Nitrate + Silver Chloride

CaCl, + 2AgNO; ——» Ca(NO3)2 + 2AgCl

4, Acid base reaction

When acid reacts with base, it gives salt and water. This reaction is known as
acid base reaction. In this reaction, the acidic nature of acid and basic nature
of base are neutralized by base and acid respectively. Thus, it is also known as
neutralization reaction. For example,

Hydrochloric Acid + Sodium Hydroxide — Sodium Chloride + Water
HCIl+ NaOH ——* NaCl + H,O

Sulphuric Acid + Magnesium Oxide > Magnesium Sulphate + Water
H2SO,+ MgO —» MgSO, + H20

Nitric Acid + Potassium Hydroxide — Potassium nitrate + Water

HNO; + KOH —* KNO; + H20

Acetic Acid + Sodium Hydroxide — Sodium Acetate + Water
CH3sCOOH + NaOH ——* CH3COONa + 1,0

Hydrochloric Acid + Ammonium Hydroxide + Ammonium Chloride + Water

Science- 10 106


HCl +NH,OH ——» NH,Cl+H 20

Conditions required for chemical reaction

Various conditions are required for various reactions to occur. Some of them are
given below.

1. Simple contact

Some reaction takes place when the reactants are brought in contact. For
example, when sodium is brought in contact with chlorine, chemical reaction
between them take place and gives sodium chloride as the product

2Na + Cl, —» 2NaCl

2. Catalyst

Some reaction takes place only in presence of catalyst such as hydrogen
peroxide (H,0;) decomposes into oxygen and water in presence of manganese
dioxide (MnO,). Catalysts are the chemical substances that do not take part in
chemical reaction but increase or decrease the rate of reaction. The catalyst
that increases the rate of reaction is called positive catalyst and the catalyst
that decreases the rate of reaction is called negative catalyst.

catalyst (MnO;
Hydrogen Peroxide = """8} Water + Oxygen

MnO,
2,0, “——» 2H,0 +024

»

Pressure
Some chemical reaction especially that of some gases takes place only in
presence of pressure. For example, nitrogen and hydrogen combine to give
ammonia only in presence of 200-900 atmospheric pressure as well as catalyst
(Fe) and promoter (Mo).

No} 3H) 2am, ONES

500°C Fe/Mo

Science- 10 107


4. Solution phase

Some reaction takes place only when the reactants are in solution phase. When
they come in contact in solid or gaseous states there are no chemical reactions
but when they come in contact in solution phase, they undergo chemical
reactions. For example,

NaCl + AgNO; ——» NaNO; + AgCl

5. Light

Some reactions take place when the reactants are exposed to light. For
example, reaction between hydrogen and chlorine is stimulated by light and
they react violently in presence of light to give hydrochloric acid.

Sunlight (bv
sunlight (hy)

H.+ Cle 2HC1

6. Heat

Some reactions take place when the reactants are heated. Heat increases the
vibration of molecules in reactants that help them to come in contact and
result into chemical reaction and give the products. For e.g.

2KCIO; A» 2KCI +30,

7. Electricity

Reaction such as electrolysis, electroplating, etc. takes place when electricity pass
through the solution of reactants. For example, water decomposes into hydrogen and
oxygen by the process of electrolysis.

2H,0 = 2H) +O)

Rate of chemical reaction

The rate of chemical reaction is defined as the time taken by the reactant to change
completely into the product. The rate of the reaction may be slow or fast which depends
upon various factors such as temperature, pressure, presence and absence of catalyst,
surface area of the reactant, ete, which are discussed as follows.

1. Temperature

In general, increase in temperature increases the rate of reaction. When the reactants
are heated, the molecules of the reactants vibrate and they come in contact rapidly as
the result, reaction takes place faster.

Science- 10 108


Activity 8.1

Take two beakers, put some oxalic acid crystals. Add about 10m of dilute sulphuric acid
in each, now add about Sml of potassium permanganate in each. Stir both solutions for
some time, They should become pink in colour. Heat one of the solutions upto 60-70°C
with the help of spirit lamp. Observe which solution decolourises first. The solution that
was heated decolourises first while another decolourise after a long time. Increase in
temperature of first solution increases the rate of reaction between oxalic acid, potassium
permanganate and sulphuric acid.

 

2, Pressure

The rate of chemical reaction especially those of gaseous reactants increase when
pressure is applied. In the gaseous reactants the molecules are far away from each
other. When they are given pressure their volume gets squeezed and as a result, the
molecules come closer to each other and collide to give the products.

Catalyst

y

The rate of chemical reaction is increased by the presence of positive catalyst.
Catalysts have special capacity of altering the rate of reaction without taking part in
the reaction. At the end of the reaction, they remain same or unaffected. Catalyst
decreases ot lowers the energy required to break the bond between the molecules of
the reactant thereby increase the rate of chemical reaction.

4, Surface area

The rate of chemical reaction increases when the reactants are used in powdered
form. This is because the surface area of the reactant increases in powdered form and
as a result, they are exposed to other reactant with large surface area. This enhances
the rate of reaction

Activity 8.2

Take two beakers and pour about 20ml of dilute hydrochloric acid in each. Weigh 2gms
zine pieces and 2gms zinc powder, keep them in watch glasses separately. Transfer the
zine pieces into one beaker and zinc powder into another. Stir with glass rod and observe
in which beaker the bubbles come first. Bubbles come from the beaker containing zinc
powder first while bubbles come after a long time from the beaker containing zine pieces.
Powder zine has more surface area than that of zine pieces so the reaction between
powder zinc and hydrochloric acid takes place faster.

Exothermic and endothermic reaction

On the basis of absorption and release of heat energy during chemical reaction, it is of
two types. When heat is absorbed during the chemical reaction, the reaction is termed as
endothermic reaction whereas when heat is released during the chemical reaction, it is
termed as exothermic reaction.

Some examples of endothermic reaction:

Science- 10 109


CaCO; + heat ——» CaO + CO, #

2KCIO; + heat ——> 2KCl+30,4

N.+0:+heat ——» 2No +

Some examples of exothermic reaction:

C+

OQ; —* CO;+ heat

CaO +H;0 — > Ca(OH); +heat

Zn +2HCl —» ZnCl, + H)+ heat

Summary

10.

11.

The combination, decomposition or displacement of molecules of matter during
chemical change is called chemical reaction.

The compounds or elements that take part in chemical reaction are called reactant.
The compound or elements formed after the chemical change are called product.

When two or more reactants combine to form a single product, the chemical reaction
is called combination reaction.

When a single compound or reactant decomposes to give two or more product, the
chemical reaction is called decomposition reaction.

When an atom or group of atoms in a molecule is replaced by another atom or group
of atoms, the chemical reaction is called displacement reaction.

When an atom in a molecule is replaced by another atom, the chemical reaction is
called single displacement reaction.

When there is a mutual exchange of atom or group of atoms between two reacting
molecules, the chemical reaction is called double displacement reaction.

When acid reacts with base, it gives salt and water. This reaction is known as acid
base reaction.

Catalysts are the chemical substances that do not take part in chemical reaction as
reactant but increase or decrease the rate of reaction.

The rate of the reaction depends upon various factors such as temperature, pressure,
presence and absence of catalyst surface area of the reactant, ete.

Science- 10 110


 

A. Choose the best alternatives.

1. What is the reaction in which two or more reactants combine to give single product?
a, Decomposition reaction b, Combination reaction
c. Displacement reaction d. Acid base reaction

2. What is the condition required for the decomposition reaction of limestone into
calcium oxide and carbon dioxide?

a. Pressure b, Solution phase. Catalyst d. Heat
3. What are the products of the reaction between sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric
acid?
a.Na(OH);+Hp b. NaCl+H;c. NaCl H;0_—d. NaCl+ H+ Op
4. What type of reaction is Mg+2HCl —> MgCl; + H;?

a. Decomposition reaction
b. Displacement reaction
c. Acid base reaction

d. Combination reaction

5. Which of the following does not affect the rate of reaction?
a. Heat ib. Light c. Pressure d. Apparatus
B. Answer the following questions.

1, What is chemical reaction? Name four conditions required for chemical reaction with
an example of each.

2. Define each of the following with two example in each:
i. Combination reaction
ii. Decomposition reaction
iii, Single displacement reaction
iv. Double displacement reaction
v. Acid base reaction

Why is an acid base reaction also called neutralization reaction?

4. Differentiate between endothermic and exothermic reaction.
Define catalyst. How does positive catalyst increase the rate of chemical reaction?

6. How is the rate of reaction affected by pressure on gaseous reactant?

Science- 10 1.


7. What happens when :
apiece of zinc is dropped in a test tube containing dilute hydrochloric acid ?

 

ii. solution of silver nitrate is poured in the solution of sodium chloride ?
iii. iron is exposed to moist air ?

iv. magnesium ribbon is burnt in air?

v. nitrogen and hydrogen comes in contact at high temperature and pressure in
presence of iron powder and molybdenum ?

vi. calcium carbonate is heated ?
vii, potassium oxide is mixed with hydrochloric acid ?
viii. carbon dioxide gas is passed through limewater ?
ix. apiece of iron is dropped in copper sulphate solution ?
x, aluminum metal is exposed to nitrogen gas ?

8. Balance the chemical equation given below.
i, | Mg+O,; ——> Mgo
ii, = N+H, ——> NH
iii, © Mg+N, ——> MgsNp
iv. KCIO, —* KCI+0,
v. Pb(NO;)), ——® PbO+NO) +0»
vii AgBr_ ——> Ag+Bry
vii. = Zn+ HCL ——> ZnCh + Hp
vii, Ch+KI —» KCI+h
ix. NaNO. +NH,Cl ——» NaCI+H,0+N>
x. Fe,Os +HC] ——> NaCl+H,0 +N,
xi. H)SO, ++NH,OH ——> (NH,);S0, + H;0
9. Change the following word equation into balanced chemical equation
i, Zine + Chlorine — Zine Chloride
ii, Carbon dioxide + Water > Carbonic acid

Science- 10 112


iii,

iv.

 

vi.

vii.

viii.

ix.

Mercury + Oxygen —> Mercurous Oxide

Aluminum + Chlorine > Aluminum Chloride

Caleium Carbonate — Caleium Oxide + Carbon Dioxide
Ammonium Carbonate > Ammonia + Carbon Dioxide + Water
Zinc + Hydrochloric acid —> Zine Chloride + Hydrogen
Potassium Bromide + Chlorine — Potassium Chloride + Bromine

Calcium Carbonate + Hydrochloric acid —> Calcium Chloride + Carbon
Dioxide + Water

Magnesium oxide + Hydrochloric acid > Magnesium Chloride + Water

Project work

Pour about two inches of vinegar into a test tube; place the test tube in test tube stand.
Take the nail and rub the tip with sandpaper, place the nail to rest in vinegar (make sure
you have a long nail). Watch and observe. Make a report on the basis of this project.
Present it in your class.

Glossary

Electrolysis:

the process of breaking down electrolytes into positive and negative ion
by supplying electricity

Electroplating: the process of depositing one metal on other metal by supplying

Science- 10

electricity

113


Unit 9 Acid, Base and Salt

In our daily lives, we have been using acids, bases and salts for various purposes. We are
using them in our food, agriculture, medicines and industries. For example, we have acids
such as citric acid, tartaric acid, ascorbic acid, etc. present in different fruits and
vegetables. Vinegar is an essential ingredient in our pickles and we cannot imagine our
food without common salts (sodium chloride). Similarly, caustic soda in the manufacture
of soap, aluminium hydroxide is used as medicine for acidity and calcium hydroxide is
used in order to neutralize the acidity of soil. Therefore, acids, bases and salts are playing
very important role in our daily lives. In this unit, we shall study about them in detail.

Acids

The word acid is derived from the Latin word “acidus” which means sour. Acids are sour
in taste such as citric acid, ascorbic acid, tartaric acid, But acids used in laboratory such
as hydrochloric acid, nitric acid and sulphuric acid cannot be tasted.

In general acids may be defined as the compound which when dissolved in water gives
hydrogen ions (H" ions) For example,

Hydrochloric acid
HCl = H'+cr
Sulphuric Acid
H)SO, = 2H" + SOs
Nitric Acid

HNO; = H’ +NO;"

Acetic Acid

 

CH;COOH = CH;COO"+ H*

Carbonic Acid

H,CO; = 2H’ + CO;

Types of Acids

On the basis of their origin, acids are of two types. They are:
1. Organic acids

Acids that are found in animals and plants are known as organic acids. For example,

Science- 10 114


formic acid is found in ant bites, citric acid in lemons, tartaric acid and ascorbic acid
are found in fruits and vegetables.

Inorganic acids

Acids that are prepared in laboratory are known as inorganic acids. For example,
hydrochloric acid, nitric acid and sulphuric acid. They are comparatively stronger
than organic acid,

Activity 9.1

Take a test tube and place piece of magnesium or limestone. Pour some dilute
Hydrochloric acid and observe. Now take another test tube and place a piece of
magnesium or limestone, pour some acetic acid and observe. In which test tube does the
bubble come first? Discuss with your friends and the teacher.

On the basis of concentration of hydrogen ions produced during ionization, they are
further divided into two types. They are:

1.

Strong Acids

‘Acids which produce more hydrogen ions during ionization in aqueous phase are
known as strong acids. Hydrochloric acid, nitric acid and sulphuric acid are some of
the example of strong acid which undergo complete dissociation to produce more
hydrogen ions in aqueous solution.

2. Weak Acids

Acids which produce less hydrogen ions during ionization in aqueous phase are
known as weak acids. Carbonic acid and acetic acid are some of the examples of
weak acid. They do not undergo complete dissociation and hence produce only less
amount of hydrogen ions in aqueous solution.

Characteristics of acids

1. Most of the acids are sour in taste.
2. Strong acids are corrosive in nature.

3. Acids change the colour of indicators as given in the table below

 

Red litmus Blue litmus Methyl orange | Phenolphthalein

 

 

 

Red Red Red Colourless

 

 

 

 

4. Acids react with reactive metals to give salt and hydrogen gas.
2Na + 2HCl ——> 2NaCI+H24

Mg +H,SO, ——» MgSO, +H) 4

Science- 10 115


2Al+ 6HNO; ——> 2Al(NOs)3+3H> 4

When acids react with carbonates and bicarbonates, carbon dioxide gas is
released along with respective salts and water.

CaCO; + 2HCl1 ——* CaCl, + H,0 + CO,
Mg (HCO;), + H,SO0, ———® MgSO, +2H,0 + 2CO,
NaxCO; +2HNO; ——® 2NaNO; +H,0 +2CO,

Acids and bases react to give salt and water.
HCl + NaOH ——* NaCl +H,0
H,SO,+ CaQ ——* CaSO4+H,0
HNO; + KOH ——» KNO; + H,0

Uses of acids

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Acids Uses
1. | Sulphuric acid (H2SO,) in industries and laboratories
2. | Hydrochloric acid (HCI) in industries and laboratories
3. | Nitric acid (HNOs) in industries and laboratories
4. | Carbonic acid (H;COs) in soft drinks
5. | Acetic acid / Vinegar (CHyCOOH) for production of pickles
Bases

Bases are metallic oxides. Some bases are soluble in water to give metal hydroxides
known as alkali. So alkalis are also bases but all the bases are not alkalis. Thus
collectively, bases are metal oxides and hydroxides that give salt and water when reacted

with acids. Alkalis give hydroxide ions (OH) when dissolved in water.

Magnesium oxide (MgO), Calcium oxide (CaO), Sodium oxide (Na;O), Sodium
hydroxides (NaOH), Potassium hydroxide (KOH) and Calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2) are

some examples of bases.

Bases are generally formed by the reaction between reactive metals and oxygen. For

example,

2Mg+0, —» 2MgO

Science- 10

 

116


4K +0; —» 2K,0

Bases are also formed when metal carbonates decompose. Such as,
A
CaCO; ——> Ca0+CO;

Naco, —*- Na0+C0,

Some bases dissolve in water to give alkalis. For example,

Na,O + HO ———> 2NaOH

K,0 + H,0 ———» 2KOH

Al,O;+ H,O0 ———> 2AI(OH)

CaO +H,;0 ——> Ca(OH),

These alkalis ionize to give hydroxyl ion in aqueous phase. For example,
NaOH = Na’ + OH

KOH = K* + OH

Types of bases

On the basis of amount of hydroxy! ions released when dissolved in water, bases are
classified into two types:

1. Strong bases

Bases that undergo complete dissociation and give more hydroxide ions when
dissolved in water are known as strong base. For e.g. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH),
Potassium hydroxide (KOH).

2. Weak bases

Bases that undergo only partial dissociation and give less amount of hydroxide ions
when dissolved in water are known as weak bases. For e.g. Ammonium
hydroxide(NH,OH) and Calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH),).

Activity 9.2

Burn a magnesium ribbon. Mix the white substance left with little water. Test the solution
with litmus paper and observe the change. Find out if the solution is acidic or basic.

Science- 10 117


Characteristics of bases
1. Bases are bitter in taste and soapy in touch.

2. Bases change the indicators into the following colour as shown in the table:

 

Red litmus Blue litmus Methyl orange Phenolphthalein

 

Blue Blue Yellow Pink

 

 

 

 

 

 

3. Bases react with acids to give salt and water
MgO +2HCl ——> MgCl, + H,0
2NaOH + H,SO, ——® Na)SO,+2H,0
KOH + HNO; ——* KNO;+ H,0,
4, Alkalis react with carbon dioxide to give carbonates and water.

2NaOH + Ct

 

) ——> Na,CO;+H,0

2KOH + CO, ——* K,CO;+ H,0

5. When alkalis react with salts like copper sulphate and ferric chloride, copper
hydroxide and ferric oxides precipitates out respectively.

Cu SO, + 2NaOH ——» Na; SO,+Cu(OH). 4

FeCl; + NH;OH ——» 3 NH,CI+ Fe(OH); 4

 

6. When alkalis are heated with ammonium salts, ammonia gas
A
(NH,):CO; + Ca(OH), ——» CaCO;+2H,0 + 2NH; #
NH,C1+NaOH —Ay NaCl+H,O+NH; 4

Uses of base

 

 

 

 

Base Uses
1. | Caustic Soda * In manufacturing soap, paper, crayon, ete.
(NaOH) fi
«  Inrefining petroleum products
2. | Calcium * For white washing
hydroxide

 

 

 

 

Science- 10 118


 

 

 

 

 

(CalOH).y * As laboratory reagent
+ For preparation of bleaching powder
3. | Ammonium + For making chemical fertilizer
hydroxide ‘As leb ;
(NH,OH) . s laboratory reagent
4, | Caustic potash] + For manufacturing of soft soaps
(KOH)
5. | Magnesium + Asan antacid to reduce hyperacidity
hydroxide
(Mg(OH);)
6. | Quick lime] © In manufacturing cement
Cac
(Cad) «For softening hard water

 

 

 

 

 

Salts

Salts are defined as the compound formed by the partial or complete displacement of one
or more hydrogen atom of an acid by metals or any other positive radical

In any salt, there is positive radical that comes from base known as basic radical and a
negative radical that comes from acid known as acidic radical

NaOH +HCl ——+NaCl +H,0 (Complete displacement)
KOH +H,SO, ——> KHSO,+HL0 (Partial displacement)

Here, in sodium chloride Na’ radical comes from base so it is a basic radical while Cl”
radical comes from acid so it is an acidic radical.

Types of salts
Salts are of four types.
1, Neutral salts

The salts formed by the complete displacement of hydrogen from acids are
neutral in nature. They are called neutral salts.

KOH+HCl —+ KCI+H,0
NaOH + H:SO, ——> Na)SO, + H20

KOH + HNO; ——* KNO; +H,0

Science- 10 119


2. Acidic salts

NaOH +Such salts are called acidic salts. These types of salts are also formed
by the reaction between strong acid and weak base.

NaOH + H,SO, ——» NaHSO, + H;,0
Here, H, partially displaced from H:SO..
H,SO,+CuO =—+ CuSO,+ H,0
H,SO, + 2NH;OH ——® (NH4)2SO, + H:0

strong acid weak base acidic salt water

wo

}. Basic salts

The salts formed by the neutralization reaction between strong base and weak
acids are basic in nature. Such salts are called basic salts.

Strong base + weak acid — basic salt + water
NaOH + H,CO; | ——* Na,CO; + H,O
KOH+CH;COOH —+» CH;COOK + H,0

acetic acid potassium acetate

-

Hydrated salts

The hydrated salts are the salts that have certain number of water molecules
associated with it, These water molecules are called the water of
crystallization or water of hydration. For example,

Sodium sulphate decahydrate, Na,SO,10H,O

Epsom salt (Magnesium sulphate heptahydrate), MgSO,7H;0

Blue vitriol (Copper II sulphate pentahydrate), CuSO.5H,O

White vitriol (Zinc sulphate heptahydrated), Zn$O,7H,0
Characteristics of salts

1. Common salt is salty in taste but most of the salts are bitter and some are
tasteless.

2. Most of the salts are white in colour and some are coloured, especially the salt
of Cu, Fe, Mn, Cr, etc. are coloured.

Science- 10 120


3. Salts are generally soluble in water and undergo electrolysis to give respective
cations and anions.

4. The salts formed by strong acid and strong base or weak acid and weak base
are neutral to all the indicator while salts formed by strong acid and weak base
are acidic in nature and those formed by strong base and weak acid are basic
in nature so they behave with indicator accordingly

Uses of salts

 

S.No. | Salt Uses

 

1. | Common salt (NaCl) * In the preparation of food
«As the preservatives

* In the manufacture of washing
soda, hydrochloric acid, sodium
hydroxide, ete.

 

2. | Copper sulphate © For electroplating

(cuso,) * As fiangicides

 

3. Anhydrous ferrous ¢ In medicine for anemia
sulphate (FeSOx)

 

4. Ammonium sulphate, ¢ As chemical fertilizers
Potassium nitrate

 

5. | Ammonium chloride © Indry cell as electrolyte

 

6. | Sodium carbonate * In the manufacture of soap,
detergents and glass

 

 

 

 

7. | Sodium bicarbonate * For the preparation of baking
powder

8. | Calcium sulphate + For plastering fractured bone

9, | Silver nitrate + As laboratory reagent

10. | Zine sulphate *  Inmedicine

¢ As white pigment

 

 

 

 

 

Science- 10 121


Neutralization reaction

When acid reacts with base, acid neutralizes basic nature of base and base neutralizes
acidic nature of acid and produce neutral salt and water. This reaction is known as
neutralization reaction. For example,

NaOH + HCl ————* NaCl + H,0

KOH + HNO; ————» _ KNO; + H,0

Ca(OH)2+ H,SO, ————> CaSO,+ H,0

Application of neutralization reaction

1.

Farmers apply lime to reduce the acidity of soil, If the soil is basic, it is treated
with composts made of rotting vegetables or leaves. The acidic gas from the
decomposition of compost neutralizes the alkalis in basic soil

  

2. We use antacid [Mg(OH), ] to get relief from hyperacidity (gastritis).
Wasp stings are alkaline in nature so vinegar is used to cure it

4. Bee stings and ant bites are acidic in nature. So soap, baking powder etc. are
applied to cure it.

5. Decaying food particles in our teeth produce acid that causes tooth decay. Using
toothpaste during brushing helps to neutralize the acid since toothpaste is alkaline
in nature.

Summary

1. Acids are defined as the compound which when dissolved in water gives
hydrogen ions.

2. Bases are metallic oxides. Some bases are soluble in water to give metal
hydroxides known as alkali.

3. When acid reacts with base, acid neutralizes basic nature of base and base

neutralizes acidic nature of acid to produce neutral compounds salt and
water. This reaction is known as neutralization reaction.

Science- 10 122


 

A Select the best alternatives.

1. What are the the product of acid base reaction ?

a, Salt + Hydrogen gas b. Salt + Oxygen gas

c. Salt + Water d. Salt + Hydrogen + Oxygen
2. Which of the following is an organic acid?

a. Acetic acid b. Hydrochloric acid

c. Sulphuric acid 4. Nitric acid
3. Which of following base is used as antacid?

a. Sodium hydroxide b. Potassium hydroxide

c. Caleium hydroxide d. Magnesium hydroxide

4, What is the acid present in ant bit ?

a. Ascorbic acid b. Mallic acid
c. Formic acid d. Acetic acid

5. An acid base reaction is also known as :
a, Neutralization reaction b. Displacement reaction
c. Decomposition reaction c. Combination reaction

B. Answer the following questions.
1. Define acid, How does it ionize in aqueous solution?
Write any four characteristics of acid.
Define organic and inorganic acid with two examples of each,
Differentiate between strong acid and weak acid.
Define base. Write two ways of formation of base.
Define alkali with examples.
Differentiate between base and alkali.

Write any four characteristics of base.

ee NAAR YN

Write any three uses of base.
10. Write any three uses of acid.

11. Why is acetic acid called weak acid?

Science- 10 123


12.
13.
14.
15.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

Define salt with two examples
Write any four characteristics of salt.

What do you mean by acidic and basic radical? Write with examples.

  

How are neutral, acidic and bi alts formed? Write with chemic:

in each.

 

equation

What do you mean by hydrated salt. Name any two hydrated salts.
What do you mean by neutralization reaction? Write two examples.
Write two uses of salts.

How do we apply neutralization reaction in our daily lives?

Name the salt that is formed by the chemical reaction between hydrochloric
acid and ammonium hydroxide. Write the balanced chemical equation as well.

Project work

1. Take

some ash powder. Prepare its solution by adding water in a glass. Similarly,

prepare a lemon solution in another glass. Then, take equal amount of both the
solution in third glass. Now perform a litmus test in three glasses. What do you
observe? Make a report and present it to your class.

2. Make a list of acid, base and salts that you use in your daily life. Write them in a
chart paper and present it to your class.

Glossary

concentration: the amount of solute present in a solution

aqueous solution: solution prepared in water

ionization: the process of breaking down of compound into positive and
negative ions

corrosive: having the power of gradually wearing out or destroying

indicators: substance that changes the colour when they come in contact

Science- 10

with acid or base

124


Unit 10 Some Gases

Carbon dioxide
Molecular formula = CO,
Molecular weight = 44

Van Helmont prepared carbon dioxide for the first time around 1640AD by burning
wood. In 1755 AD, Joseph Black prepared carbon dioxide by buming magnesium
carbonate. Late in 1783 AD, Lavoisier studied its properties.

Occurrence

Carbon dioxide occurs in free and combined state in nature. It is present in about 0.03%
of atmosphere. Similarly, it is produced when wood, coal, fuel, ete. burn. It is also
produced during respiration of plants and animals and the decomposition of metal
carbonates and bicarbonates such as calcium carbonate and magnesium carbonate.

Laboratory preparation of carbon dioxide

Theory

Carbon dioxide is prepared in laboratory by the reaction between marble pieces (CaCOs)
and dilute hydrochloric acid.

CaCO;+2HCl ——*> CaCl, +H,0 + CO,*#

Apparatus required

1. Woult’s bottle
2. Thistle funnel tie
3. Gas jar funel
4. Delivery tube
5. Cork | asa
Chemicals required
~CO, ges

  

1. Dilute hydrochloric acid (HCI) Bs

2. Marble pieces (CaCO;) :
Procedure

a. Wash and fit the apparatus as shown in the diagram.

b. Pour dilute hydrochloric acid from the thistle funnel into the woulf’s bottle
containing marble chips.

c. Brisk effervescence takes place due to the reaction between marble chips and
dilute hydrochloric acid.

Science- 10 125


d. The carbon dioxide so formed in collected in a gas jar by the upward
displacement of air since CO) is heavier than air.

Precaution

* Thistle funnel should be dipped into hydrochloric acid in order to prevent the
escaping of CO, formed through it.

* Delivery tube should be above the solution for passing the CO) so formed into
the end of gas jar.

* The apparatus should be airtight.
© The gas should be collected by upward displacement of air.
Other methods of preparation of carbon dioxide

1. By buming carbon in air
c+0, —> Co,
2. By buming hydrocarbon in air
CH, +70. —>4CO) + 2H,0
2CsHs + 70, —4CO,+ 61,0
3. By the reaction between carbonates and bicarbonates with acids
Na;CO; + H:SO;—» NaSO,+H,0+CO, 4

Mg(HNOs).+2HCl —» MgCl + 2H,0 + 2C

 

Manufacture of carbon dioxide

When carbon dioxide is required in big amount, it is manufactured by heating calcium
carbonate in big furnace. The carbon dioxide so formed is used for industrial purpose and
the by-product calcium oxide is used for white washing and it is also used to prepare
limewater.

A
CaCO; ——® Ca0+ CO,
(Quick time)

CaO +H,O —> Ca(OH),
Slaked lime (limewater)

Science- 10 126


Properties of carbon dioxide

Physical properties

1.
2.

aye Y

Carbon dioxide is a colorless, odorless gas.

It is soluble in water under pressure and when dissolved in water, it has sour
taste.

Itis 1.5 times heavier than air.
It turns wet blue litmus into red colour.
When it is cooled upto -78°C it tums into a white solid ice known as dry ice.

It is not a poisonous gas but it may cause the loss of consciousness due to
increase in concentration of carbon dioxide in the body.

Chemical properties

1.

Carbon dioxide is neither combustible nor supports combustion. But burning
magnesium ribbon keeps on burning when inserted into the jar containing carbon
dioxide and gives white powder of magnesium oxide.

2Mg+ CO, ——* 2Mg0+C
Carbon dioxide dissolves in water and gives carbonic acid at high pressure.
CO, +H,O ——* H,CO;

When carbon dioxide is passed through limewater, it first turns into milky
solution due to the formation of insoluble CaCO; and if the carbon dioxide is
continued to pass for a long time, it again turns into colourless due to the
formation of solution calcium bicarbonate.

Ca(OH),+ CO, ——> CaCO; + H,0

Lime water (milky) insoluble
CaCO; + H,0 + CO, ——» Ca(HNO;),
(milky) (colourless) soluble

insoluble

Carbon dioxide combines with water in presence of sunlight and chlorophyll to
form carbohydrate.

sunlight
6CO,+ 6H,0 ——_ C1205 + 602

chlorophyll

Science- 10 127


Carbon dioxide reacts with red hot coke at 900°C to give carbon monoxide,
900°C.

CO, + C ————+ 2co
Carbon dioxide reacts with ammonia at about 1500°C and under pressure to form
urea,

1s00'C
CO, +2NH; —""_ NH,CONH, + H.0

Activity 10.1

Prepare limewater with the help of quick lime (calcium oxide). Then, blow air with the
help of a pipe. What happens? Observe and discuss with friends. Also write the chemical
reaction involved. Ask for help with teacher, if necessary.

Uses of carbon dioxide

1.

Activity 10.2

Study and observe carefully a fire extinguisher. Learn how to use it and
how it works. Perform this activity only under the direct supervision of
your teacher.

Carbon dioxide is used in the drinks such as soda water, soft drinks, beer, etc. to
have sour taste.

Itis used as a raw material for the photosynthesis by the green plants.
tis used in the manufacture of urea and washing soda (Na;CO;).

Itis used to make dry ice which is used to preserve fruits, fish, and meat products
for a long time

It is also used as fire extinguisher. It does not itself react to extinguish the flame
but helps to reduce the flame by displacing oxygen supply since it is heavier gas.

Itis also used in the manufacture of sugar from sugar cane. Carbon dioxide along
with calcium hydroxide helps to remove colour, gum and amino acids impurities

The mixture of 95% oxygen and 5% carbon dioxide gas is known as carbogen. It
is used as medicine for pneumonia.

 

Ammonia

Molecular formula = NH3

Molecular weight = 17

Science- 10 128


Ammonia is a gas containing one nitrogen and three hydrogen atoms. It was first prepared
by Antoine Lavoisier. He heated ammonium chloride and ammonia gas was liberated.
Later on, Bertrelot and Davy studied about its composition.

Occurrence

Ammonia occurs in nature in trace amount. It is produced from the nitrogenous animals
and vegetable matter. Ammonia and ammonium salts are also formed in small quantities
in rainwater whereas ammonium chloride and ammonium sulphate are found in vole:
areas.

 

Laboratory preparation of Ammonia
Theory

Ammonia is prepared in laboratory by heating the finely crushed mixture of dry solid
ammonium chloride and calcium hydroxide in the ratio 2:1.

A
2NH,Cl + Ca(OH), ———® CaCl,+ 2H,0 + 2NH3 t

Ammonium Chloride + Calcium hydroxide 4 Calcium Chloride + water + ammoniaf

Apparatus required
Maxture of NH,Cl and Ca(OH),

Gas jar
‘Ammonium gas

 
     
 
 
 
 

 

1. Hard glass test tube

Bunsen burner (sprit lamp)
Hard glas Stand

test tube

Source of _f
heat

Gas jar

Delivery tube

 
  

ye ey

Stand & clamp

Chemicals required
1. Ammonium chloride (NH;Cl)
2. Caleium hydroxide ( Ca(OH):)

Procedure
a. Wash and fit all the apparatus as shown in the diagram

b. Take mixture of ammonium chloride and slaked lime in 2:1 ratio in a hard glass
test tube.

c. Clamp it in an inclined position so that the water so formed during chemical
reaction may not drop at the hot bottom of the tube

d. Heat the mixture.

Science- 10 129


e. Collect the ammonia gas so formed by downward displacement of air since it is
lighter than air.

Precautions
© The hard glass test tube should be inclined as shown in the diagram.
© The hard glass should be made airtight with the help of a cork
© The gas jar should be dried because ammonia is highly soluble in water.
© Heat should be provided uniformly.
Some other methods of preparation of ammonia
1, By heating salts of ammonia
2 (NH,),;CO; —4-» 2 NH;+ H,0 + CO,
ammonium carbonate

2. By heating ammonium salts with strong bases
NH,Cl+ NaOH ——* NaCl + H,O + NH3 t
(NH,); $0,+2KOH ——* K,SO,+2H,O +NH; 4

Manufacture of ammonia gas

‘Ammonia is manufactured in large scale by combination reaction of nitrogen from the air
with hydrogen derived mainly from natural gas (methane). The process is also known as
Haber’s synthesis of ammonia. The reaction is reversible and exothermic. Fine powder of
iron is used as catalyst and molybdenum is used as promoter. Similarly, 400-500°C heat
is provided and 200-900 atmospheric pressure is applied for the reaction to take place.
500°C, Fe/Mo
No+ 3H,» 2NH+ heat
200-900 atm
Therefore, for the better yield of ammonia, following conditions should be met,
1. Temperature should be maintained between 400-500°C.
2. Atmospheric pressure of 200-900 atmosphere should be applied.
3. Fine powder of iron should be used as catalyst.
4,

Traces of Molybdenum should be used as promoter which enhances the
function of catalyst.

5, Reactants i.e. nitrogen and hydrogen should be used in 1:3 ratio.

Science- 10 130


Properties of ammonia

Physical properties

1.
2
3.
4.
5,

6.

Ammonia is a colourless and tasteless gas with pungent smell.
Itis highly soluble in water.

It is lighter than air.

It is neither combustible nor a supporter of combustion.

It is basic in nature.

Its liquifies at -33.4°C and solidifies at -78°C.

Chemical properties

1.

Ammonia is highly soluble in water. It dissolves in water to give ammonium
hydroxide which is a weak base (alkali).

NH;+ H,0 ————> NH,OH
Being weak base reacts with acid to give salt and water.
2 NH,OH + H,SOQ, ————-® (NH;),SO, + H,O
NH,OH+HCL_ ————» _NH,CI+H,0

NH.OH +HNO; ————* NH,NO;+H;0

Ammonia reacts with carbon dioxide under pressure at the temp of 1500°C
to give urea.

2NH;+CO, 1 __ -NH)-CO- NH) + HO
urea

Ammonia reacts with acid to give ammonium salts.

NH;+HCl ————> NHLCl

2NH; + H,SO, ————* (NH, ).SO4

Ammonia burns in air with greenish yellow flame to form nitrogen and water.

3NH3+ 302 —————® 6H:0 + 2Nz

Science- 10 131


Activity 10.3

Take 100ml of hydrochloric acid and 100ml of liquid ammonia. Place both the beaker
containing hydrochloric acid and liquid ammonia near to each other. Observe what
happens. What is the smoke that comes from hydrochloric acid containing beaker? Now
slowly add liquid ammonia to hydrochloric acid, you would see a very thick and dense
smoke appearing. Discuss with friends and try to write down the reaction involved. Ask
with your teacher, if necessary.

Uses

1. Ammonia is best used in fertilizer industries for the manufacture of chemical
fertilizers like urea, ammonium sulphate, ammonium nitrate, ammonium chloride
etc.

2. It is also used in the manufacture of nitric acid, dyes and alkalis.

3. It is also used in the manufacture of pharmaceuticals such as sulfa drugs,
vitamins and cosmetics.

4, It is used in the synthetic textile fibers such as nylon, rayon and acrylics.

The petroleum industry utilizes ammonia in neutralizing the acid constituents of
crude oil and for the protection of various equipment from corrosion.

It is also used in water and wastewater treatment such as pH control.
It's used as the developing agent in white printing, blue printing of maps.

It is used as cleansing agent for removing oil and grease.

ee aS

It is widely used as refrigerant in refrigerator.

10, It is also used in rubber, leather and paper industries,

. The food and beverages industry uses ammonia as a source of nitrogen for yeast
and microorganisms.

Summary

1.

Carbon dioxide is prepared in laboratory by the reaction between marble pieces
(CaCO) and dilute hydrochloric acid.

Thistle funnel should be dipped in hydrochloric acid in order to prevent the escaping
of CO formed through it.

Delivery tube should be above the solution for passing the CO; so formed into gas
jar.

CO, gas is collected by upward displacement of air since it is heavier than air.

When carbon dioxide is required in big amount, it is manufactured by heating
calcium carbonate in big furnace.

Science- 10 132


6. Ammonia is prepared in laboratory by heating the finely crushed mixture of dry solid
ammonium chloride and calcium hydroxide in the ratio 2:1.

7. The ammonia gas is collected by downward displacement of air since it is lighter than
air.

8. The gas jar should be dried during the preparation of ammonia gas because it is
highly soluble in water.

9. Ammonia is manufactured in large scale by combination reaction of nitrogen from
the air with hydrogen derived mainly from natural gas (methane). The process is also
known as Haber’s synthesis.

 

A. Select the best alternatives.
1. How is carbon dioxide collected during its laboratory preparation?
a. downward displacement of water
b. downward displacement of air
c. upward displacement of water
c. upward displacement of air
2. What is the main component for the industrial production of carbon dioxide?
a. methane gas
b. carbon and oxygen
c. calcium carbonate
d. magnesium carbonate

3. What would be the nature of the solution when carbon dioxide gets dissolved
in water?

a. acidic b. colorful
c. gives hydrogen gas d. gives offensive smell

4. What is the ratio of ammonium chloride and calcium hydroxide for the
preparation of ammonia gas?

a. 1:2 b. 2:1 ec. 3:1 d. 1:3

Science- 10 133


5. What is the temperature when carbon dioxide turns into dry ice?
a. -77°C b. -79°C ©. 78°C d. -78°C
B. Answer the following questions.

1. Draw a neat-labeled diagram for the preparation of carbon dioxide gas in a
laboratory.

2. What happens when the carbon dioxide gas is taken near a burning match
sticks?

3. Why is carbon dioxide gas collected in upward and open gas jar?

4. What happens when carbon dioxide gas is collected by downward
displacement of water?

5. What is carbogen? Write down its uses.

6. Write any two uses of carbon dioxide.

7. What happens when carbon dioxide is passed through lime water for short
time and for long time? Explain with chemical equation.

8. What happens when burning magnesium ribbon is inserted into the jar of
carbon dioxide?

9, What is dry ice? Write down its uses.

10. Study the diagram and answer the questions.

i, Which gas is being collected in the gas jar?

ii, What happens when wet blue litmus is
inserted into the gas jar and why?

iii. Write down the chemical reaction occurring
in Woulf’s bottle.

iv. What happens when sulphuric acid is used
instead of hydrochloric acid?

 

11. Draw a neat, well labeled diagram of the
laboratory preparation of ammonia gas.

12. What happens when wet red litmus is inserted into the jar of ammonia gas? Why?
13. Mention any two physical properties of ammonia gas.

14. How is urea prepared by using ammonia? Write its chemical equation.

15. What is Haber’s synthesis? What are the conditions required for it?

16. Write down any two uses of ammonia gas.

Science- 10 134


17. What happens when ammonia gas is passed through the solution of hydrochloric
acid?

18. Study the diagram and answer the given questions.

i. Which gas is being collected in the gas

Jar?
ii, Why the hard glass test tube is slightly
inclined? SS
Write down the balanced chemical

reaction that takes place inside the hard
glass test tube.

  

Project work

Visit nearby soda water shop or soft drinks factory and study how it to the carbon dioxide
is mixed with water. Prepare a report and present in your class.

Glossary
Fire extinguisher: an equipment that is used to put off fire
Pneumonia: an acute and chronic inflammation of lungs caused by viruses

Science- 10 135


Unit 11 Metals

We have been using metals since ancient times for different purposes. Metals are being
used in different sectors such as industries, households, transportation, weapon making,
jewelleries, electric wires, coins, etc. Metals are good conductor of heat and electricity.
They are malleable and ductile. They are shiny and lustrous. Properties as such made
metals even more useful.

 

Metals are generally present as minerals or ores. Minerals are those naturally occurring
substances that contain metals in more or less amount, whereas ores are the minerals from
which metals can be extracted conveniently and profitably. In this unit, we shall study
some useful metals in detail.

Some important metals
Iron

Symbol — Fe

Atomic number — 26

Atomic weight — 56

Valency — 2 (Ferrous), 3 (Ferric)

Electronic configuration

 

Atomic Number K |L M N

 

 

2 8 14 2

 

26

 

 

 

 

 

1s? | 28?2p* 38°3p'3d° | 4s?

 

Position in periodic table
Group — VIII
Period — 4"
Block—d

Occurrence

Tron is not found in free state in nature due to its reactive nature. It exists in combined
form of ores as chlorides, sulphides, oxides, hydroxides, carbonates, etc. It is also found
in the haemoglobin of animal blood. Some ores of iron are

1, Haematite, Fe,O3 (Chief ore)
2. Magnetite, Fe;O,

Science- 10 136


3.

4,
5.

Siderite, FeCO;

. Limonite, Fe203.3H:0

Iron pyrite, FeS)

Among all these ores, haematite contains about 72.5% iron. It is present abundantly in
nature. So iron is generally extracted from this ore.

Physical properties of iron

Iron is a shiny and grayish white metal.

It is malleable and ductile.

It is good conductor of heat and electricity.

It is a magnetic substance but turns non magnetic above 770°C.

Its specific gravity is 7.86.

Its melting point is about 1500°C while its boiling point is about 2500°C.

Uses of iron
Iron is used in the construction of machine parts, building materials such as rod,
pipes, nut and bolts, nails, tools, weapons, parts of vehicles, railway tracks,
bridges, etc.
© Itis mostly used in the manufacture of steel.
* It is used to make different types of household utensils.
© Itis also used as a catalyst in various chemical reactions.
Aluminium
Symbol - Al

Atomic number — 13

Atomic weight ~ 27

 

 

 

 

Valency ~ 3
Electronic configuration
Atomic Number K L M
B 2 8 3
1s? 2s°2p® 3s°3p!

 

 

 

 

 

Position in periodic table

Group — IIIA
Period — 3"
Block - p

Science- 10 137


Occurrence
Aluminium is abundantly present in earth crust, It does not occur in free state. It occurs as
oxides, sulphates, fluorides, etc. Some ores of aluminium are:
1. Bauxite, AlLO;2H;0
2. Cryolite, NasAIFs
3. Feldspar, K(AISis.Os)

Aluminium is extracted from bauxite ore because it is easily available in nature.

   

Physical properties of aluminium
Aluminium is a shiny, silvery white coloured metal.

It is very light and strong metal, its specific gravity is 2.7.

It is highly malleable and ductile

It is good conductor of heat and electricity.

Its melting point is 660°C and boiling point is 1800°C.
Uses of aluminium

« Aluminium is used to make kitchen utensils because of its resistance to corrosion
and light weight.

Itis used to make body parts of vehicles and aeroplanes.

Itis used to make alloys, wires for electricity, coins, ete.
It is used to make silver paints by mixing its powder with oil.

It is used in packaging as cans, foils, frames, for wrapping food, pharmaceuticals,
etc.

© Itis used in construction of window, doors, siding and roofing
Copper

Latin name - Cuprum

Symbol ~ Cu

Atomic number ~ 29

Atomic weight — 63.57

Valency ~ 1 or 2

Electronic configuration

 

 

 

Atomic Number K |L M N
2 8 18 1
29
Is’ | 2s*2p° | 38°3p"3d!°_—_ | 4s!

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Science- 10 138


Position in Periodic table

Group — IB or 11

Period — 4"
Block —d
Occurrence

Copper occurs in free as well as in combined state in nature. But very less copper is found
in free state. Large amount of copper occurs in ore as their sulphides, oxides and
carbonates. Some of the ores of copper is given below.

1.

RYN

5.

Copper pyrite (Chalcopyrite), CuFeS2
Cuprite, CuO (Ruby copper)
Chalcocite (Copper glance), CuyS
Malachite, Cu(OH)>. CuCOs
Azurite, Cu(OH)2. 2CuCOs)

Among all these ores, copper pyrite is the chief ore, so copper is extracted from it.

Properties of copper

Physical properties

Copper is a shiny, reddish brown metal.

It is highly malleable and ductile.

It is very good conductor of heat and electricity.

Its’ specific gravity is 8.95.

Its melting point is 1083°C and boiling point is 2350°C.

Uses of copper

Being very good conductor of heat and electricity, copper is widely used for
making electrical wire and cables.

It is also used to make household utensils.

It is used for the preparation of useful alloys such as bronze , brass (Cu + Zn) ,
german silver (Cu + Zn + Ni), etc.

It is used for electroplating and electrotyping.
It is also used to make coins, ornaments and jewellery.
Copper salts are used as insecticides, fungicides, germicides, dyes and pigments.

It is also used in electronics and related devices.

Science- 10 139


Silver

Latin name - Argentum
Symbol - Ag

Atomic number — 47

Atomic weight — 107.9

 

 

 

Valency — 1
Electronic configuration
AtomicNumber |K = | L M N o
2 |8 18 18 1
47
Is? | 2s°2p° | 3s°3p°3d"° | 4s*4p°4a'?_ | Ss!

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Position in periodic table
Group ~ IB or 11

Period — 5”
Block —d
Occurrence

Silver occurs in free as well as in combined state. It occurs in the form of ores as
sulphides and chlorides. Some of its ores are,

1. Argentite or silver glance, AgoS

2. Silver copper glance, (AgCu),S

3. Hom silver, AgCl

4. Ruby silver (Pyrargylite), Ag:Sb.S3
Among these ores, silver is extracted from Argentite.
Physical properties of silver

© Silver is a shiny white metal

© It is very good conductor of heat and electricity.

*  Itis highly malleable and ductile.

* Its’ specific gravity is 10.5.

© Its’ melting point is 960°C and boiling point is 1955°C

Science- 10 140


Uses

Gold

Silver is used to make jewellery, coins and decorative articles.
It is used to make mirrors as it is the best reflector of visible light.
Itis used industrially in electrical contacts and conductors.

It is used in photographic films and x-rays

 

It is used to make coins, medals, idols, statues, precious decorative items, etc.
It is also used in manufacture of solar panel.

It is also used in water purifiers to prevent bacteria and algae from growing in the
filters,

It is also used in dentistry to fill in teeth cavities as silver amalgam.
It is also used in medicine

Silver nitrate and other silver compounds are used as laboratory reagent.

Latin name - Aurum

Symbol - Au

Atomic number — 79

Atomic weight — 197.2

Valency ~ 1 (Aurous) or 3 (Auric

 

Electronic configuration

 

 

Atomic
Number |K |E M N oO P
2 32 18 1
19
Is! 4s°4p°4d"°agt 5s’5p%sd'°__| 6s!

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Position in periodic table

Group — IB or 11
Period — 6”
Block ~d

Science- 10 141


Occurrence

Gold is a noble metal; it does not react with other element in normal conditions so it is
found in free state in nature. It is found in reef gold mixed with quartz or alluvial soil
eroded by the river. Therefore, gold is extracted from alluvial sand that is rich in gold.

Physical properties

Gold is a shiny yellowish metal.
It is very good conductor of heat and electricity.

Its specific gravity is 19.3.

Its melting point is 1063°C and boiling point is 2530°C.
It is highly malleable and ductile.

Uses of gold

Gold is used for making jewellery, statues and other ornaments.
It is used to make medals and coins.

Itis used for gold plating

It is used in dentistry.

It is used to make corrosion resistant electrical connectors in computerized
devices.

It is used for making gold leaf electroscope

Its salts are used as anti-inflammatories in medicine.

Activity 11.1

Take samples of iron, copper, aluminium, silver and gold (if possible). Note the
appearances of each sample. Clean the surface of each sample by rubbing them (except
for gold and silver) with sand paper and note their appearance again.

Summary

1.

2.

3.

Metals are the compounds which are good conductor of heat and electricity. They
are malleable and ductile.

Metals are generally present as minerals or ores.

Minerals are those naturally occurring substances that contain metals in more or
less amount whereas ores are the minerals from which metals can be extracted
conveniently and profitably.

Haematite, Magnetite, Siderite, Limonite and Iron pyrite are the ores of iron
among which Haematite is the chief ore.

Science- 10 142


Bauxite, Cryolite and Feldspar are the ores of aluminium and bauxite is the chief
ore.

Copper pyrite, Cuprite, Chalcocite, Malachite and Azurite are the ores of copper
of which copper pyrite is the chief ore.

Argentite, Silver copper glance, Horn silver, Ruby silver are the ores of silver and
argentite is the chief ore.

Gold is a noble metal so it exists in its native state in alluvial sand and mines.

Select the best alternatives.

Which of the following is chief ore of iron?

a, Haematite ‘b. Copper pyrite c. Magnetite d. Argentite
Which of the following is not a coinage metal?

a. Iron b. Gold c. Silver d. Copper
Which of the following metal has highest specific gravity?

a. Aluminium b. Gold c. Silver d. Iron
Which of the following metal is extracted from bauxite?

a, Gold b. Iron ec, Aluminium d. Silver
Which of the following is not a use of aluminum?

a, It is used to make body of aeroplane.

b. It is used to make utensils.

c. _ Itis used in packaging.

d. It is used an alloy such as bronze.

B. Answer the following questions.

1.
2.
3.

saws

Write any two features of metals.

Why are metals electropositive in nature?

Write down the position of iron in periodic table with the help of its electronic
configuration.

Mention any four ores of iron. Also identify which of them is its chief ore.

Write any two physical properties of iron.

How are iron used in our daily lives?

What is the position of aluminium in periodic table? Write down its electronic
configuration too.

Name any three ores of aluminium.

Science- 10 143


10.
11.

12.

13,

16.
17.
18.

19.

20.

22.

What are two physical characters of aluminium that make it suitable for making
body part of aircrafts?

Write two uses of aluminium.

Show the position of copper in periodic table with the help of its electronic
configuration.

Name any three ores of copper.

. Write any two physical properties of copper.
14,
15.

Write any two uses of copper.
Atomic number of silver is 47. Show the distribution of electron in its subshell.
Also mention its position in periodic table.

Write the names of two silver ores.
Why is silver called metal? Give two reasons.
Mention any two uses of silver.

. Atomic number of gold is 79. Show the electronic configuration of gold and also

mention its position in periodic table.

. Gold is found in pure state in nature but not iron, Why?
21.

Write any two physical properties of gold.
What are the uses of gold?

Project work

Take an aluminium or copper wire. Clamp this wire on a stand, Fix a pin to the free end
of the wire using wax. Heat the wire with a sprit lamp or candle near the place where it is
clamped. What do you observe after sometime? Note your observation and present it to
the class.

Glossary

malleable: able to be hammered into this sheets

 

specific gravi

alloys:

capable of being pulled into thin wire.

rock containing metal from which the metal can be extracted
profitably

the ratio of the density of a substance to the density of water at
ac

a metal that is a combination of two or more elements at least
one of which is metal

 

gold leaf electroscope: an instrument for detecting and measuring static electricity that

Science-

contain a thin piece of gold leaf

10 144


Unit12 Hydrocarbon and its Compounds

As the name suggests, hydrocarbons are the compounds formed by the
combination of hydrogen and carbons. The main source of hydrocarbons is
petroleum and natural gases. In some hydrocarbons, some foreign elements such
as oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, etc. may be present. There are mainly two types of
hydrocarbons. They are,

1. Saturated hydrocarbon
2. Unsaturated hydrocarbon
1. Saturated hydrocarbon

The hydrocarbons in which carbon atoms are connected by a single covalent
bond are known as saturated hydrocarbons. They are called alkanes. Their
molecular formula is written by the formula C,H»:2 , where n represents the
number of carbon. For example, Methane (CH,), Ethane (C)H,), Propane
(CsHs), ete.

2. Unsaturated hydrocarbon

The hydrocarbons in which carbon atoms are connected by two or three
(double or triple) covalent bonds are known as unsaturated hydrocarbons. The
hydrocarbons in which carbon atoms are connected by double covalent bond
are known as alkenes. Their molecular formula is written by the formula
Cutan where n represents the number of carbon. For example Ethene (C:H:) ,
Propene (CsH,), Butene (C)Hs), ete.

They hydrocarbon in which carbon atoms are connected by triple covalent bonds
are known as alkynes. Their molecular formulas are written by the formula C,H2n.
2 where n is the number of carbon atoms. For example, Ethyne (CH,), Propyne
(C3H.), Butyne (CsHs) ete.

TUPAC system of nomenclature

The full form of IUPAC is International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
This is an organization which suggests us the system of nomenclature on naming
of hydrocarbon. According to IUPAC system of nomenclature, hydrocarbons are
named with the formula: prefix + word root + suffix. But in class ten, we don’t
study about the hydrocarbons that have prefix. So, for class ten, we use the
formula: word root + suffix. Here, word root shows the number of carbon and the
suffix shows the number of carbon-carbon bond in any hydrocarbon.

 

Depending upon the number carbon atom following word roots are used.

Science- 10 145


C\- Meth C2 Eth

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cy Prop Cy But

C; Pent Co- Hex

Cy- Hept Ce- Oct

Cy Non Cio- Dee

Depending upon the number of carbon-carbon bond, following suffix are used.
Hydrocarbon Number of C-C bond Suffix
Alkane Carbon-Carbon single bond -ane
Alkene Carbon-Carbon double bond -ene
Alkyne Carbon-Carbon triple bond -yne

TUPAC names of alkane
SN | Alkanes Word | Suffix | IUPAC

root names

1 CHy meth | ane methane
2 CH; CH; eth ane ethane
3. | CH; CH, CH; prop | ane — | propane
4 CH; CH; CH; CH; but ane butane
5. | CHs CH, CH; CH2 CHs pent | ane — | pentane
6. CH; CH; CH; CH; CH; CH; hex, ane hexane
7. | CH CH, CH, CH; CH)CH2 CH; hept | ane — | heptane
8 CH; CH; CH; CH; CH; CH; CH; CH; oct ane octane
9. | CH CH, CH; CH, CHy CH, CH, CH: CHs non | ane — | nonane
10. | CH; CH; CH, CH; CH; CH, CH, CH,CH; CH; | dec ane decane

Science- 10 146

 


TUPAC names of alkene

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SN | Alkenes Word | Suffix | IUPAC
root names
1. | CH:=CH, eth ene | ethene
2. | CH)=CHCH; prop ene — | propene
3. | CH)»=CHCH;CH; but | ene ‘| butene
4. | CH)= CHCH;CH,CH; pent ene | pentene
5. | CH)=CHCH,CH,CH;CH; hex |ene — | hexene
6. | CH)= CHCH;CH;CH,CH:CHs hept ene | heptene
7. | CH)= CHCH,CH;CH,CH;CH;CH; oct fene | octene
8, | CH)=CHCH,CH,CH,CH,CH;CH3CH3 non | ene — | nonene
9. | CH)= CHCH;CH;CH,CH;CH;,CHCH;CH; | dec [ene —_| decene
IUPAC names of alkyne
SN | Alkynes Word | Suffix | IUPAC
root names
1. | CH=CH eth | yne | ethyne
2. | CH=C-CH; prop | yne — | propyne
3. | CH=C-CH;CH; but | yne | butyne
4 CH pent | yne | pentyne
5. | CH=C-CH,CH,CH;CH; hex | yne | hexyne
6. | CH=C- CHsCH,CH,CH:CH3 hept | yne — | heptyne
7. | CH=C- CH;CH,CH;CH;CH,CH3 oct | yne | octyne
8. | CH= C- CH;CH;CH,CHyCH,CH2CHs non | yne | nonyne
9. | CH =C- CH,CH,CH;CH,CH,CH;CH; dec | yne | decyne
Science- 10 147

 


Functional group

An atom or group of atoms that determine the physical and chemical properties of any
hydrocarbon is known as functional group. For example, hydroxyl group (— OH) is the
functional group of alcohol and ether group (— O — )is the functional group of ether. It
is attached to the alkyl radical and forms organic compound called derivative. For
example

 

 

 

Alkane Alkyl radical | Functional | noivative | TUPAC) Common
group name | name

Methane (CH,) | Methyl [CH; -] | -OH CH;OH Methanol | Methyl! alcohol

Ethane (C:H,)_ | Ethyl [C:Hs-]_ | -OH H;OH | Ethanol | Ethyl alcohol

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Homologous series

  

A series of organic compounds having similar functional group that can be represented by
same general formula are called homologus series. The compounds in homologus series
are arranged in increasing order of carbon i.e. each successive member of homologus
series differ by CH) group. All the members of homologus series can be prepared by
similar methods. For example,

Homologus series of alkane:

[By common formula CyHon+2]

 

1. CHy Methane
2. CH; CH; Ethane
3. CH; CH;CH; Propane
4. CH3CHz CH) CHs Butane
5. CH; CH) CH; CH; CH; Pentane
Homologus series of alcohol:
1, CH;OH Methanol
2. CHyCH,OH Ethanol
3. CHsCH;CH,OH Propanol
4 CH,CH,0H Butanol
5. CH;CH;CH,CH;CH,OH Pentanol

Science- 10 148


Some important hydrocarbons and their uses

a. Methane
Molecular formula: CH, Structural formula:
Condensed formula: CHy i
H—C—H
4

Methane is the first member of alkane series. It is formed during the decomposition
of organic matter. It is found in marshy land so they are also known as marsh gas. It
is also found in natural gas, petroleum and coalmines and biogas.

Uses of methane
* Methane is used as fuel in households and in industry.

+ Itis used in the manufacture of methyl chloride, chloroform, carbon tetrachloride,
formaldehyde, methyl alcohol, etc

© It is used to make carbon black, that in turn, is used in rubber industry.
© It is used to make printing ink and paints.
b. Ethane
Molecular formula: C2H.
Condensed formula: CH; CH:

Structural formula: 4 4
H—€ — O-f

i |

H oH

Ethane is the second member of alkane series. It occurs in natural gas, coal along
with methane. It is also found in petroleum mines

Uses:

¢ Ethane is also used as fuel along with methane.

*  Itis also used for preparing other organic compounds.
c. Propane

Molecular formula: C3Hs

Condensed formula: CH; CH; CHs

Structural formula:

rot f
H-EC-~£ =< <H
1 I I
H H oH

Science- 10 149


Propane is the third member of alkane series. It occurs in natural gas and petroleum
mines. It is a highly inflammable gas.

Uses:
© Propane is used as a fuel in lighters.
© Itis used in petroleum industries for cooling purpose.
d. Butane
Molecular formula: C,Hio
Condensed formula: CHjCH,CH2CH3

Structural formula:

 

ae
qe =t —f<—8

| | I |

H H HoH

Butane is the fourth member of alkane series. It also occurs in petroleum mines along
with other hydrocarbons.

Uses:
* Butane is used in LP gas as it can easily be liquefied under pressure.
«It is used in rubber industry as raw materials.

Isomers and isomerism

The organic compounds having similar molecular formula but different structural formula
are called isomers. The properties of organic compounds to exist in two or more isomers
are known as isomerism. Hydrocarbons having four or more carbons are capable of
forming isomers or they show isomerism. For example,

Butane

Molecular formula: CsHio

Isomers
(CH3-CH2-CH2- CH3 n-butane
CH
(CH; — CH— CH; iso-butane
Pentane

Molecular formula: CsHi

Science- 10 150


Isomers.

(CHy-CHp-CHz- CH2-CHs n-pentane
CHs
CH; — CH - CH;— CH iso-pentane
CH;
CHs— € — CH; neo-pentane
|
CH;
Alcohols

Organic compounds formed by replacing one or more hydrogen of alkane by hydroxyl
group (—OH group) are known as alcohols.

+H
C)Hs —————> ©; H;0H

+0H
Ethane Ethyl alcohol (Ethanol)

Its general formula is CaHon+1 OH
Types of alcohol

Depending upon the number of hydroxyl group present in alcohol, it is of three types.
They are:
1. Monohydric alcohol

The alcohol having only one hydroxyl group (—OH) is called monohydric alcohol. It
is formed by replacing one hydrogen of alkane by hydroxyl group. For example,
methyl alcohol (CH;OF), ethyl alcohol (C2HsOH ), propyl alcohol (C3H;OH ).

CHy >> CHj0H

2. Dihydric alcohol
The alcohol having two hydroxyl group (—OH) is called dihydrie alcohol. It is
formed by replacing two hydrogens of alkane by two hydroxyl group. For example,
Ethylene glycol

-2H
C,H —————> C)H;(OH)2
+20H

Ethane Ethylene glycol

Science- 10 151


3. Trihydric alcohol

The alcohol having three hydroxyl groups is called trihydric alcohol. It is formed by
replacing three hydrogen of alkane. For example, glycerol (glycerine).

aH
Cy. ————> C3Hs(OH);
+30H

Ethane Glycerol
Some important alcohol and their uses
Methyl alcohol
Molecular formula: CH;OH
Condensed formula: CH;OH

Structural formula: i

 

It is the first member of monohydric alcohol series. It is formed by replacing one
hydrogen of methane by hydroxyl group (—OH).

-H
CH, ———>CH;~ OH
+ OH

Uses
© Methyl alcohol is used as fuel in sprit lamp since it produces heat without smoke.
© Itis used in the manufacture of perfumes, dyes, paints, synthetic fibre, etc
© Itis used to dissolve fats, oil, paints and varnish, ete.

© It is used as the starting material for preparation of compounds like methyl
alcohol, formaldehyde, ete.

Ethyl alcohol
Molecular formula: C;HsOH
Condensed formula: CH;CH,OH

Structural formula:

HoH

I I
Het = De

| |

H H

Science- 10 152


It is the second member of monohydric alcohol series. It is formed by replacing one
hydrogen atom of ethane by a hydroxyl group.

-H

C:Hs ———>C2HsOH
+OH

Uses
* Ethyl alcohol is used in the manufacture of alcoholic beverages.
*  Itisused as a fuel.
*  Itis used in alcohol thermometer.
* It is used to make medicines, paints, soap, varnish, synthetic rubber, etc.
© It is used to dissolve fat, oil, paints, resin, etc.
© Itis used in hospitals to clean wounds and tools.

* It is used as laboratory, reagent to prepare various compounds like ether,
chloroform, iodoform, etc.

Glycerol
Molecular formula: C3Hs (OH)
Condensed formula: CH;OHCHOHCH;0H

Structural formula:

OH OH OH

I
nfo

H HH

The word glycerol is derived from “glyceros” which means sweet. It is a trihydric aleohol
formed by the replacement of three hydrogen atoms of propane by three hydroxyl groups.
Glycerol is a colourless viscous liquid with sweet taste.

Uses
* Glycerol is used as sweetening agent in confectionary, beverages and medicines.
© It is used in manufacture of high quality soaps, cosmetics, lotions, cream, ete.

© Itis used as a preservative for fruits and tobi

 

© Itis used in the preparation of printing ink and stamp pad inks.

¢ — Itis used as a lubricant in watches.

Science- 10 153


Glucose

The word glucose was derived from “glukus” which means sweet. Glucose is a simple
sugar with the molecular formula C,H;3,. It is white powder, which is easily soluble in
water. It is formed during photosynthesis from water and carbon dioxide in presence of
sunlight and chlorophyll whereas just reverse process occurs during respiration. The
glucose is broken down into water, carbon dioxide and energy in animals and plants
during cellular respiration.

Ghucose can be obtained by hydrolysis of carbohydrates such as milk, sugar, cellulose
found in different fruits and food. Glucose is an important source of energy in most
organisms from bacteria to humans. But when it is present in high and low amount in
blood, it is harmful in either case.

Activity 12.1

Bring models of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen atoms and bond stick from science laboratory.
Prepare the structure of hydrocarbons connecting the models and show it to your teacher.

OR

If you do not have models in your school, take some clay, toothpick and colour, Make
small balls of clay, do not colour them. These are carbon atoms. Make even smaller balls
of clay colour them with white colour. These are your hydrogen atoms. Now, join them
with toothpick and make the models of different hydrocarbon. Show it to your teacher.

Summary

1. Hydrocarbons are the compounds formed by the combination of hydrogen and
carbons.

2. The hydrocarbons in which carbon atoms are connected by a single covalent
bond are known as saturated hydrocarbons.

3. The hydrocarbons in which carbon atoms are connected by two or three (double
or triple) covalent bonds are known as unsaturated hydrocarbons.

4. The full form of IUPAC is International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry.

5. An atom or group of atoms that determines the physical and chemical properties
of any hydrocarbon is known as functional group.

6. A series of organic compounds having similar functional group that can be
represented by same general formula are called homolgus series.

7. The organic compounds having similar molecular formula but different structural
formula are called isomers.

8. The properties of organic compounds to exist in two or more isomers are known
as isomerism.

Science- 10 154


9. Organic compounds formed by replacing one or more hydrogen of alkane by
hydroxyl group (—OH group) are known as alcohols.

10. Glycerol is a trihydric alcohol formed by the replacement of three hydrogen
atoms of propane by three hydroxyl groups

11. Glucose can be obtained by hydrolysis of carbohydrates such as milk, sugar,
cellulose found in different fruits and food.

A. Select the best alternatives.
1. Which of the following is not an unsaturated hydrocarbon?
a. Ethene b. Ethyne _c. Propyne d. Propane
2. What is the formula used to write the molecular formula of alkane?
a. CaHan+2 b. CaHon.2 ce. CoH dd. CaHon1
3. What is the full form of IUPAC ?
a. _ International Union of Planning and Applying Chemistry
b. Indian Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
c. International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry
d, International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry Center
4. What kind of alcohol is glycerol ?
a. monohydric alcohol
b. — dihydric alcohol
c.  trihydric alcohol
d. absolute alcohol
5. What does the formula CHT, 06 denote ?
a.glycerol glycol c. hexane d. glucose
B. Answer the following questions.
1. Define the terms
i, Hydrocarbon
ii, Saturated hydrocarbon

iii. Unsaturated hydrocarbon

Science- 10 155


Pe NAAR YH

16.
17.
18.
19.

20.

21.
22.

What is meant by homologous series in organic compound?

What is IUPAC system of nomenclature? Write down its full form.
Write down the structural formula of methane.

Mention any three uses of methane.

Write down the structural formula of ethane.

Mention any three uses of ethane.

Write the structural formula of propane.

Write the name and structural formula of the substance formed due to the
displacement of three hydrogen atoms of propane with three hydroxyl (OH) groups.

Mention any two uses of propane

Write the structural formula of butane.

Mention any two uses of butane.

What is isomers and isomerism?

Write the isomers of butane and pentane. Also mention their names.

Answer the following questions with the help of structural formula of hydrocarbon
given below.

H-C=C-H

  

 

i. Name the hydrocarbon given.

ii, Is this hydrocarbon saturated or unsaturated? Why?

‘What do you mean by alcohol? How is it formed?

Write the structural formula of ethyl aleohol.

Mention any two uses of ethyl alcohol.

Write the structural formula of glycerol. What type of alcohol is this?
Write any four uses of glycerol.

What is glucose? How is it formed?

What is the function of glucose in living organism?

Science- 10 156


Project work

1. Visit a place where alcohol is prepared. Perform a short interview with the person
who prepares alcohol. Make a report on the basis of your observation. Present it
in your class. Ask for feedback from your teacher.

2. Prepare a list of hydrocarbon and its compound being used in your house. Also
mention their uses. Present it to your class. Ask for feedback from your teacher.

Glossary
suffix: one or more letters or sounds added at the end of a word
prefix: one or more letters or sounds added at the beginning of a word

marshy land: an area of low, wet land often with tall grass

Science- 10 187


unit13 Materials Used in Daily Life

Everything around us is ultimately made up of chemicals be it living or non living
things, natural or man made. Chemistry is very important because it helps us to know
the composition, structures and changes of matter. In our every day lives, various
products made up of chemicals are being used in various forms. These products not
only fulfill basic needs of humans but also makes their lives easier, comfortable and
more luxurious. For example, the chemical substances such as cement, plastics,
fertilizers, pesticides, glass, soap and detergents, fibres, medicines and dyes are the
integral part of our lives without which our lives become almost impossible. In this
unit we study about the composition and uses of such substances.
Cement
Cement is a fine gray powder of calcium silicate and calcium aluminate that is
prepared by calcium carbonate (CaCO;) and special type of clay (Al,O;Si0,). It sets
into hard rock like form that binds other materials together during construction of
infrastructures.
Manufacture of cement
The raw materials that are used for the manufacture of cement are
1. Lime stone (CaCO,)
2. Special type of clay (Al,03 Si0;).
3. Gypsum (CaSO,.2H,0)
The manufacture of cement from above mentioned raw materials involves following
steps,
1. Crushing and grinding
The big lumps of limestone and the special type of clay are first crushed and
grounded into fine powder separately.
2, Slurry formation
The powder of limestone and clay is mixed in 2:1 ratio along with water to make
semi liquid mixture known as cement slurry.
3. Heating of slurry
The slurry thus formed is fed into the rotary kiln where it is heated at the
temperature of about 1400°C to 1600°C
In the kiln limestone decomposes into calcium oxide and carbon dioxide. The
calcium oxide so formed combines with alumina (Al;03) and silica (SiO2) to
form calcium aluminate and calcium silicate respectively. As a result, small pea
sized red balls of cements are formed which are known as cement clinkers.

158


Chemical composition of cement clinkers are calcium silicate and calcium
aluminate.

2CaCO; + Al,0,Si0, “4, Ca$iOs + CaAlOs +2 CO) +
1400-1600°C
4. Mixing with gypsum
To slow down the setting time of cement and improve its quality, the cement
clinkers are mixed with 2-3% of hydrated calcium sulphate known as gypsum.
5. Final grinding

The mixture is again ground into fine powder. This fine powder is finally called

cement, which is packed into airtight bags and stored in dry place to protect it

from moisture.
Uses

* Cement is used to make cement mortar, which is a mixture of cement, sand
and water, which is used for building and plastering of walls.

© It is used to make concrete, which is a mixture of cement, sand, water, and
gravel, which is used for roofing, flooring and making pillars of buildings.

* It is used to make reinforced cement concrete (RCC) which is a mixture of
cement, sand, water and gravel along with iron framework inside which is
used for making pillars, roofs, floors of building and bridges.

Glass

Glass is hard, transparent, amorphous metallic silicate of different metals. Glass,
though seems to be solid, the molecules of glass are found moving very slowly like
that occurs in extremely cold liquid so it is also called a super cooled liquid. That is
why the window pane of old houses got thick at the bottom while thin at the top. The
main raw material or component of glass is silica found in sand.

Depending upon the components and chemical mixed in it, glass is of different types.
Some of them are given below.

1.

Quartz glass
When pure silica is strongly heated at 1600°C and allowed to cool slowly, it turns
into quartz glass.

160°C
Pure silica —— Quartz glass
It differs from other glasses in not containing any other ingredients except silica.
Therefore, it is superior to other types of glasses due to its purity. For these
reasons, it is used to make laboratory equipment, lenses, gems, basins, crucibles,
electric tools, etc.

159


Water glass

When a mixture of silica (SiO,) and sodium carbonate (Na,COs) or potassium
carbonate (K,COs) is heated at 800°C water glass is formed which is sodium
silicate.

A

SiO; +NayCO, ——> Na,Si0;+ CO,
Sodium silicate

SiO, +K,co; _A_, K,SiO;+ CO,

Potassium silicate
It is soluble in water, so it is called water glass. Water glass is used for making
fireproof materials, adhesive and chemical garden. A chemical garden is an
experiment in chemistry normally performed by adding metal salts such as
copper sulphate or cobalt (II) chloride to an aqueous solution of water glass. This
results in growth of plant like forms in minutes to hours

 

Ordinary glass or soda glass
The glass formed by fusing a mixture of 50% silica, 15% sodium carbonate, 10%
calcium carbonate and 25% glass pieces at 850°C in a special type of tank
furnace is ordinary or soda glass. It is the most common type of glass. The
mixture melts into a viscous liquid, which is poured into moulds or blown with
iron pipe to make different glasswares. The almost ready glasswares are cooled
slowly. This process is known as annealing. Annealing makes the glassware
resistant to temperature fluctuation. By this process, glasswares do not break
easily when something hot or cold is put in it.
2SiO2 + NayCO; + CaCO; ————#Na,Si0;.CaSiO; + 2CO,
Glass pieces

Ordinary glass is used for making bottles, light bulbs, window panes and several
other useful objects. It is also known as soft glass.
Hard glass or potash lime glass
The glass formed by fusing a mixture of potassium carbonate, calcium carbonate
and silica is called hard glass or potash lime glass. It has high melting point and
can withstand high temperature.

28102 + KxCO; + CaCO; =9——® _ K,SiO3.CaSiO3;+ 2CO;
It is used for making laboratory apparatus like beakers, hard glass test tube, tube
lights etc.
Borosilicate glass
The glass formed by fusing a mixture of silica, sodium carbonate, calcium
carbonate and boric oxide is called borosilicate glass or pyrex glass. It is resistant
to the chemicals and heat.

5SiO, + NayCO; + CaCO; + B,0, A, Na,SiO;.CaSiO; B, (SiO3); + 2CO,

160


It is used to make laboratory apparatus such as test tubes, breakers, flasks,
condensers and kitchenwares.

6. Lead crystal glass
The glass made by fusing a mixture of silica, potassium carbonate and lead
monoxide is called lead crystal glass. This type of glass has high refractive index
28i0) + KxCO;+PbO —S—» K,SiO;.PbSiO;+ CO,
It is used to make apparatus like hard glass test tube, prism, lenses, high quality

 

 

and kitchenwares.

Coloured glass
The glass is made coloured by adding different metal oxide in molten glass. Different
metallic oxides impart different colours. Some examples are given below.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SN | Colour Metal oxide
1. | Blue Cobalt oxide

2._| Black Nickel oxide

3._| Green Cupric oxide, Chromium oxide
4._| Purple Manganese dioxide

3._ | Yellow Ferric oxide

6._| Red Cuprous oxide

7.__| White Tin oxide

 

 

 

 

 

Coloured glass is used for making sunglasses, decorative items, signals for
automobiles, trains and aeroplanes, ete.

Ceramics

Ceramics is special type of clay used for pottery, bricks kitchen wares, ete.
Chemically, it is a hydrated aluminium silicate (Al,O3.SiO,.2H,0). It may have
other substances such as magnesium, carbonates, oxides of manganese, limestone
and iron. The pure white clay is also known as kaolin or china clay.

Production of different materials from ceramics

The clay is crushed, ground and sieved. It is then mixed with water to make paste.
Then, it is given different shapes on a potter’s wheel. Then, it is dried and heated in
kilns at high temperature. Heating makes the objects hard and strong and make them
durable but still is porous and absorbs water. So, now it is coated with tin oxide or
lead oxide and then again heated. This process is called glazing. Glazing makes the
object waterproof and beautiful. It is also painted with metal salts and different
designs to make it more attractive.

Ceramics can withstand high temperatures. It is resistant to chemicals, poor
conductors of heat and electricity and is hard and brittle. Because of all these
properties, they are widely used for following purposes.

161


1. Ceramics are used to make different kitchen wares such as cup, plates, bowls and
dishes,

2. Being poor conductor of electricity, they are used as insulators in electrical
appliances.

3. They are used to make artificial teeth and bone joints

4. They are also used to make bathroom tiles, sinks, commodes, roof tiles and
bricks.

Polymers and Plastics

Polymers is an extremely large molecule consisting of a chain or network of small

molecules called monomers. The process of forming polymer by large number of

monomers is known as polymerization, For example, polyethene is a polymer

obtained by joining large number of ethene (CH, = CH). Similarly, Vinyl chlorides

are monomer units of polymer PVC (Polyvinyl chloride)

@ n(CH,= CH) _ polymerization» CHp- CHp. CH)- CH
Ethene Polyethene
Gi)
n(CH:= CHCl) _polymerization | CH2- CHCI... ... ... CHC CH)
Vinyl chloride Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)

Polymers may be natural such as protein, starch, cellulose, silk, wool, rubber or

synthetic such as plastics, nylon and terylene.

Plastics

The word plastics comes from the greek word ‘plastikos’ which means capable of

being moulded. So, plastics means a manmade polymer which can be moulded to any

shape when they are warm. The starting monomers for plastics are obtained from

crude oil and small quantities other substances often used to improve performances

or to reduce cost.

Types of plastics

Plastics are of two types

1. Thermoplasties

2. Thermosetting plastics

1, Thermoplasties
Plastics which becomes soft on heating and hard on cooling are known as
thermoplastics. The monomers in this type of plastics are connected via straight
chain, They can be moulded again and again into different shapes. For example,
polycthene, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polystyrene or polyster, etc.

162


Some thermoplastics and their uses

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SN | Plastics Uses

1. | Polyethene Polycthene bags, sheets, pipes

2. | Polyvinyl chloride Pipes, raincoats, soles of shoes, handbags,
boots, floor covering, bottles

3. | Polystyrene Packing materials, thermocole

 

 

Thermosetting plastics

Plastics which are hard and strong and are resistant to heat is known as
thermosetting plastics. The monomers in thermoplastic setting plastics are
arranged in cross linkage, which cannot be broken down by heating. So, they
cannot be moulded again and again. For example, bakellite, melamine, ete.

Some thermosetting plastics and their u

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SN | Plastics | Uses

1, | Bakellite | Housing of radio, TV, switches, plugs, handles of cooker,
kettles, astrays, ete.

2. | Melamine | Unbreakable kitchenwares such as cup, plates, bowls, glasses,
ete.

 

Advantages of plastics
1. They can be easily shaped and moulded.

2. They do not get rot, rust. They are unaffected by chemicals. So they are very
durable.

3. They are cheap and light.

4. They can be used as insulators for heat and electricity.

5. They can be recycled (except thermosetting plastics).

Disadvantages of plastics

1. They are non biodegradable and cause pollution.

2. They produce poisonous gases and smoke when burnt.

3. They easily catch fire.

4. They do not look as good as wood, stone or metals.

163

 


Soap

Soap is substance used for cleaning purposes. Chemically, it is a salt of fatty acids
that is capable of carrying away dirt along with water. Soaps are obtained by treating
vegetable or animal oils and fats with a strong base such as sodium hydroxide or
potassium hydroxide in an aqueous solution. A few drops of sodium chloride are
added in order to increase precipitation. The process of making soap is known as
saponification.

An example of soap is Sodium Stearate: NtOOCR or NaCOOC\7H3;.
C3H;(OOCR); + 3NaOH =——® 3NaOOCR + C3H;(OH);

fats/oils alkali soap glycerol
Here, R represents alkyl radical of long chain hydrocarbons.

R=Ci;Hss = Stearate

R=CidHss = Oleate

R=CjsH3; = Palmitate

When soap is used for cleaning purposes in hard water, it reacts with the salt of
calcium and magnesium present in hard water to form a brown layer on the clothes

known as scum. So, soaps are not very good for cleaning purpose in hard water. But
since soaps are biodegradable, they do not cause any pollution.

Detergents

Detergents are synthetic organic compounds obtained from hydrocarbon extracted
from petroleum such as alkyl benzene sulphonate. Therefore, detergents are the
sodium salt of long chain benzene sulphonic acid. Detergents are suitable for
cleaning purposes in hard water, they do not react with calcium and magnesium salt
of hard water so do not form any scum. Detergents are cheaper than soaps because
they are formed from the byproduct of petroleum. Therefore, detergents are also
known as soapless soap as they have cleansing action like soap but are formed by the
chemicals that are different from soap. One example of detergent is Sodium lauryl
sulphate (C;2H2sSO,-Na’).

But most of the detergents are non-biodegradable so they are not broken down into
simpler and harmless form by the microorganism. Thus, they cause chemical
pollution.

Activity 13.1

To prepare soap and observe its washing effect

 

 

1. Take about 40 ml of any vegetable oil in a beaker.

2. Take about 15 gm of sodium hydroxide in 50ml of water and make sodium
hydroxide solution.

164


Add sodium hydroxide solution into oil slowly with constant stirring.
Boil the mixture with constant stirring till a thick paste is formed.
‘Add small quantity of sodium chloride into the thick paste.

Mould the pa
Check the cleansing action of soap.

aa Ye

ste into desired shape and allow it to harden.

 

The remaining solution is glycerol.
Fertilizers

Plants absorb the nutrients from the soil. Continuous growing of crops leads to the
consumption of a lot of nutrients from the soil. Consequently, the nutrients and
minerals in the soil decrease. Beside these natural processes such as rain and soil
erosion also decreases the nutrients in soil. As a result, soil fertility is decreased and
the production or yield becomes poor. The addition of fertilizer provides essential
elements to the growing plants as well as nourishes the microorganism

Thus, the fertilizers are the substances that are added to the soil to replenish the
nutrients consumed by growing plants. A good fertilizer should be easily soluble in
water and it should not leave any harmful impact to the soil.

Types of fertilizers
There are two types of fertilizers

1. Organic fertilizers

2. Inorganic or chemical fertilizers
1. Organic fertilizers

The fertilizers that are formed by the decomposition of dead plants, dead
animals, and animal wastes are known as organic fertilizers. They are also
known as composts. The green manure and animal manure are the examples of
compost.

When the green plants are grown in the land are ploughed back into the soil.
They decay in the soil and supply nutrients. This type of fertilizer is called green
manure. Green manure is highly nutritive so adds a layer of humus in the soil.
Cow dungs, poultry droppings can directly be used in the soil in order to increase
the fertility of soil.

Other way of using organic fertilizer is by collecting the organic waste from
kitchen in a bin or pit and let them decompose by microorganism to give
compost. The compost so formed is collected and sprinkled in the soil.Organic
fertilizers are very good in providing organic matter to the soil. They do not
cause any environmental pollution. They retain the water in the soil and also
prevent the soil damage. But they are unable to provide inorganic matter such as
nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium sufficiently to the soil.

165


2. Inorganic or chemical fertilizers

The man made chemical compounds which when added to the soil, provide the
essential nutrients required for the growth of soil are known as inorganic or
chemical fertilizers. The chief elements necessary for the growth of plants are
nitrogen, potassium and phosphorus.

Insecticides

Man made poisonous chemicals that are used for destroying or killing harmful
insects are known as insecticides. Generally, most insecticides are poisonous and
non-biodegradable. They are toxic to humans and animals. So, sincere precaution
should be taken during their application. There is both advantages and disadvantages
of using insecticides. Disadvantages are mostly long term and severe so insecticides
should be used as less as possible. Insecticides with very minimal residual effect
should be used. Some examples of insecticides are,

1. Malathion

Parathion

Dichloro dephenyl trichloro ethane (DDT)
Benzene hexa chloride (BHC)

Dialdrin

Aldrin

Baygon

eI aA RYN

Turmic
Classification of insecticides
1. Organic insecticides

a. Organochlorine
DDT, BHC, Aldrin, Dialdrin, Methoxychlor

b. Organophosphorous
Malathion, Parathion, Phosdrin

c. Carbamate : Baygon,Turmic
2. Inorganic insecticides
Calcium Arsenate, Fluorides, Lead arsenate, Lime sulphur
Advantages of insecticides

1. They control harmful insects destroying all the stage of life cycle and
increase crop production.

2. They also help in disease control.

166


Disadvantages of insecticides
1. The continuous use of insecticides makes the insects more resistant to them.
2. Insecticides may kill useful insects also thereby disturbing the ecosystem.

3. If no precaution is taken, farmers may suffer from its harmful effect on
health,

4. Consumption of fruits and vegetables with insecticides residue may lead to
serious diseases like cancer to humans.

Fibres

Fibres are thread like strong materials used for making clothes, nets, ropes, etc. There
are two types of fibres. They are:

1, Natural fibres

Fibres that are obtained from animals and plants are called natural fibres such as
cotton from cotton plants, silk from silkworm, wool from sheep, rabbit, etc.
Natural fibres have some good quality such as retaining body heat, not catching
fire, absorb perspiration, and beautiful and classic in looks. However, these are
not available abundantly. There are some other disadvantages as well which are
as follows:

a, They shrink when washed with water.

b. Insects easily attack them.

c. They are very expensive.

d. They absorb a lot of water so difficult to get dried.
e.

. They do not retain crease on ironing.
Artificial fibres

rp

The man made fibres are called artificial fibres. They are of two types.
a, Synthetic fibres

Man made fibres made by chemical processes is called synthetic fibres. For
example, nylon, terylene, terywool, etc.

-

Reeyeled fibres

These are the man made fibres by recycling the natural fibres. For example,
Rayon is prepared by cotton cellulose and wood pulp. It looks like silk and is
also called “artificial silk”.

Artificial fibres are strong and more convenient. They do not shrink on washing.
They are not attacked by insects. They are easy to wash and dry up quickly.
Moreover, they are cheap and can be manufactured as much as required. This
way synthetic fibres overcome all the demerits of natural fibres.

167


Chemical Pollution

The pollution caused by excessive use and improper disposal of chemicals is called
chemical pollution. Chemical used in different forms such as fertilizer, insecticides,
soaps, detergents, plastics, etc are polluting the environment. Increase in population
and modemization increases demands of different chemicals in the form of various
products. Their improper use and disposal are contaminating the environment more
seriously these days.

Causes of chemical pollution
1. Use of chemical fertilizer and insecticides

It is said that use of chemical fertilizer and insecticides is necessary evil. It is
necessary for increasing the production of crops to meet the demand of
increasing population but at the same time, it is causing different harmful effects
such as air, soil and water pollution. Chemical fertilizer and insecticides are the
chief chemical pollutants, which not only decreasing the air, soil and water
quality but also spreading, eye, lung diseases to humans.

 

 

Besides, mixing of chemical fertilizer in water sources enhances the over growth
of algae which absorb oxygen in water and causes death of fish and other aquatic
life by the lack of oxygen content in water

2. Household, automobile and industrial wastes

The household wastes such as unwanted food, vegetables, clothes, detergents, ete,

are thrown wherever possible, so household wastes are one of the most common
source of pollution. Similarly, industries and vehicles such as car, buses,
motorbikes, trucks etc., emit gases such as carbon monoxides, carbon dioxide,
sulphur dioxide, sulphur trioxides, etc. These are the major gases that cause air
pollution. And also these gases combined with water to form acids such as
carbonic acid, sulphuric acid, nitric acid, etc. come down as acid rain.

 

The smoke coming out from vehicles also combines with fog to form smog,
which causes poor visibility, and disturb road and air traffic.

3. Plastics

Plastics are the major constituents of solid wastes. It is non biodegradable and
remain in the environment for a long time. When burned also they produce toxic
gases. So plastics are another big problem that cause chemical pollution.

4. Colouring materials of food

Different food colours are used to make the food attractive but most of the food
colours are made up of chemicals so they harm human health directly or
indirectly causing different diseases.

168


5. Metallic particles

Different metallic particles such as lead, chromium, arsenic, mercury, cadmium,
etc. get mixed with air via different sources such as petroleum products, metallic
particles used materials like mercury vapour filled tube lights, etc. Exhaust of
automobile gives out lead oxide when human inhale it, it causes severe effect on
human health. When metals such as arsenic get mixed with water, it kills aquatic
animals and causes different skin diseases to humans.

6. Dyes

Dyes are released out from textiles and leather industries, caustic soda, etc. which
causes water pollution when mixed in water resources.

 

Control of chemical pollution

1. Public awareness should be raised.
Population growth and unplanned urbanization should be controlled.
Use of insecticides and chemical fertilizer should be limited.

Proper monitoring mechanism should be developed.

yeep

Biodegradable and non-biodegradable waste should be separated.
Biodegradabe waste should be made compost and non-biodegradable waste
should be subjected to recycling and reusing. Necessary training for this
should be given to public.

6. Use of colour and dyes in food materials should be prohibited.

7. Toxic gases from industries should be filtered before allowing it to mix with
air.

8. Industries should be established far from human settlement.
Solid waste management

Any unwanted, useless materials generated in solid state as a result of various human
activities are known as solid waste. With the increase in population, solid wastes are
increasing day by day. It has now become a challenge to manage solid waste in a
proper way. A research shows maximum of solid wastes are organic, so if segregated
properly, the problem of solid waste can be solved easily.

In the past, solid wastes were managed locally. Almost all the wastes were used as
organic manure. But in the course of time, large volumes of solid wastes were
produced and the nature of solid wastes became very different. Due to which, it was
impossible to manage solid wastes locally. Till this date, it has been challenging to
manage solid wastes of large cities and towns even though government and a lot of
non-government organizations are being involved. Here are some of the significant
actions that can be taken in management of solid wastes.

 

169


Reduction in generation of solid wastes

The best and foremost action that should be taken in solid waste management
is to reduce its generation or production. This can be done by producing
quality products. Quality products have long life span so they run for a long
time, thus reduces the production of solid waste. Also, purchasing the product
only in absolute necessity also reduces the generation of solid waste.

Reuse of solid waste materials

Reuse or recycling of solid wastes is another important step in the management
of solid wastes. Some articles may have more than one application, such as, oil
and other food container can be used to store household good, plastic bags and
bottles can be recycled.

Generation of energy

The organic solid wastes can also be used for the generation of biogas. The
proper method should be applied for the generation of energy from solid waste
rich in organic matter.

Production of fertilizer from wastes

Solid wastes rich in organic matter can also be converted into compost manure.
They can also be used for vermiculture. These manures are rich in nitrogen,
phosphorus and potassium so are very good for agriculture.

Incineration

Incineration is the process of burning the wastes at high temperature, i.e. about
500-1200°C in a special type of fumace. The hot gases produced during
incineration can be used to operate turbine for the generation of electricity but
this method is not practiced in Nepal yet.

Land filling
This process refers to the disposal of solid waste materials by burying it at a
landfill site. Landfill silts are generally selected far from human residence.

Lots of considerations are taken both in engineering and environment level
before using certain land as landfill site.

Summary

1.

Cement is a fine grey powder of calcium carbonate (CaCO;) and special type
of clay (Al03SiO;) and is used in construction,

The raw materials that are used for the manufacture of cement are, lime stone,
special type of clay and gypsum.

Glass is hard, transparent, amorphous and super cooled liquid of metallic
silicate of different metals.

170


10.

ll.

12.

13.

14.

15.

Ceramics is special type of clay used for pottery, bricks kitchen wares, etc. It is
a hydrated aluminium silicate.

Polymers is an extremely large molecule consisting of a chain or network of
small molecules called monomers. The process of forming polymer by large
number of monomers is known as polymerization.

Plastics is a manmade polymer which can be moulded to any shape when they
re-warm.

The plastic which become soft on heating and hard on cooling is known as
thermoplastics.

The plastics which are hard and strong and are resistant to heat are known as
thermosetting plastics.

Soap is a salt of fatty acids that is capable of carrying away dirt along with
water.

Detergent is a synthetic organic compound obtained from hydrocarbon such as
alkyl benzene sulphonate

The fertilizers are the substances that are added to the soil to replenish the
nutrients consumed by growing plants.

Man made poisonous chemicals that are used for destroying or killing harmful
insects are known as insecticides.

Fibres are thread like strands which are strong materials used for making
clothes, nets, ropes, etc.

The pollution caused by excessive use and improper disposal of chemicals is
called chemical pollution.

Any unwanted, useless materials generated in solid state as a result of various
human activities are known as solid waste. Solid waste management can be
done by reduction in solid waste generation, reuse of solid waste, generation of
energy from solid waste, production of fertilizer from waste, incineration and
land filling.

171


Select the best alternatives.

What are the raw materials for the manufacture of cement?
a. silica and sodium carbonate

b. limestone and special type of clay

c. limestone, special type of clay and gypsum

d. fats or oils and sodium hydroxide

Which glass is formed by fusing silica and sodium carbonate or potassium
carbonate?

a. quartz glass b. water glass

c. borosilicate glass d. ordinary glass
Which metal oxide is used to make green glass?
a, cobalt oxide b. nickel oxide

c. chromium oxide d. copper oxide
Which chemical is used for glazing?

a. lead oxide b. magnesium oxide
c. sodium oxide d. iron oxide

Which of the following does not cause any environment pollution?
a. DDT b. Soap

c. Detergent d. Urea

Answer the following questions.

Define cement and cement clinkers.

Why is gypsum added into cement?

What are the raw materials required for the production of cement? Also
describe the process of manufacture of cement.

What is glass? Why is the lower part of windowpane thicker than the upper part
after may years?

Differentiate between hard glass and soft glass.
What are the substances used to make pyrex glass?
What is quartz glass? Also mention two of its uses.

What are the metallic oxides that should be mixed to make glass red, blue and
green colour?

172


9.
10.
1
12.

13.
14,
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25,

26.

27.

28.

29.
30.

What do you mean by plastics? Why is plastic becoming popular day by day?
Define polymer and polymerization.
Differentiate between thermoplastics and thermosetting plastics.

Why is thermosetting plastic used to cover the handle of pressure cooker
instead of thermoplastic?

What is ceramics? Write down two characteristics of ceramics.
What are the uses of ceramics?

What is glazing? Why is it necessary?

Differentiate between soap and detergent.

Why is detergent called soapless soap?

Why is soap not suitable for washing with hard water?

What do you mean by fibres? Give two examples each of natural and synthetic
fibres.

What do insecticides mean? Give any two examples.
Use of insecticides is called necessary evil, why?
Write the full form of DDT and BHC.

What do you mean by fertilizers?

Differentiate between organic and chemical fertilizers.
What is NPK fertilizer?

What are the functions of nitrogen in plants? Give any two example of nitrogen
fertilizer.

What are the functions of phosphorus in plants? Give any two examples of
phosphorus fertilizer.

What are the functions of potassium in plants? Give any two examples of
potassium fertilizer.

What is chemical pollution? Write two of its causes and controlling measures.

How can solid waste be managed?

Project work

1.

Visit your community. Interview at least 10 families about what they are
doing for their solid waste management. Draw a conclusion on this basis.
Prepare a report and present it to your class. Ask for feedback from your
teacher.

173


2. Visit nearby village or farm. Interview the farmers about the fertilizers they
are using. List the names of fertilizers. Prepare a report and present it to the
class. Ask for feedback from your teacher.

3. Visit nearby construction site where house, building or RCC is prepared and
used in construction. Prepare a report and present it to the class. Ask for
feedback from your teacher.

Glossary
grinding:

viscous:
annealing:
porous:

poultry dropping:
exhaust:

biodegradable:

non-biodegradable:

crushing the substance to make them into smaller pieces
having a thick, sticky consistency between liquid and solid
cooling slowly

containing pores

excreta of chickens, ducks, ete.

to draw or let out completely

capable of being decomposed by biological activity specially
by microorganism

not biodegradable

174


Unit 14 Invertebrates

You must have seen people involved in rearing silkworms and honey bees.
Why do you think people rear silkworms and honey bees? What types of
animals are these insects?

Silkworms and honey bees are the invertebrates. Invertebrates are the animals
which do not possess vertebral column. Invertebrates are divided into nine
phyla including arthropoda. The animals kept under the phylum arthropoda
have jointed legs and their bodies are covered with a thick chitinous cuticle
called exoskeleton. This Phylum consists of insects like silkworm and honey
bees which are very usefull to us. People get silk from silkworms and highly
nutritious honey from honey bees. Silk is used to make clothes. The clothes
made from silk are soft and durable. In this unit, we will study about the body
structure, life cycle and uses of silkworms and honey bees.

SILKWORM

The rearing of silkworm for the production of silk is called sericulture.
Mostly, two types of silkworms are reared in Nepal for producing silk. They
are

 

i, Seri Silkworm (Bombyx mori)
ii, Eri Silkworm (Adtacus ricini)

Seri- Silkworm feeds on mulberry leaves and Eri Silkworm feeds on castor
leaves. Silk produced by Seri- Silkworm is shiny, creamy and white fibre
while Silk produced by Eri-Silkworm is creamy, white but less shiny. It has
been found that maximum quantity of silk (about 95%) produced in the world
is mulberry silk or seri silk.

Structure: An adult Silkworm is 2.5 cm long and
creamy white in colour. Its body is divided into
head, thorax and abdomen. Its entire body is
covered by minute hairy scales. The head bears a
pair of compound eyes, a pair of antennae and
reduced mouth parts. Thorax bears three pairs of
legs and two pairs of wings. Fig.14.1

 

Mate silkworm Female silkworm

Its proboscis is highly reduced as it does not feed during adult stage. The body
size of female silkworm is larger than the male because they have to produce
a large number of eggs.

175


Life Cycle of Silkworm

A silkworm is unisexual i.e. sexes ADULT FEMALE DUET MALE:
are separate. Male silkworm dies
immediately after mating but
female silkworm lays eggs and
dies after 4-5 days. The life cycle
has four stages which completes
within about 45 days.

 

i Egg
ii, Larva
iii, Pupa
iv. Adult eae

 

The life cycle of silkworm is called metamorphic life cycle due to having four
stages quite different from each other.

Egg: More than 300 eggs are laid upon the leaves of mulberry by the female
silkworm after mating. The eggs are whitish or yellowish white and semi
round. Normally, the eggs are hatched into larva after 10 to 12 days at about
the temperature of 25°C.

In sericulture, the eggs are placed in a cold storage until the mulberry leaves
are not available. It is because the larva of silkworm feeds on mulberry leaves
only. When the mulberry leaves become available, the eggs are kept in a
special incubator at the temperature of about 18°C. Gradually, the temperature
is increased up to 25°C. At this temperature, the eggs are hatched into larvae.

Larva: The larva of silkworm is called caterpillar. It lasts for 25 to 32 days.
The newly hatched larva is called first instar larva. It moves around in a
special looping manner. It has a small head with chewing type of mouth part
(madibulate) , large and segmented thorax with three pairs of true joined legs,
elongated and segmented abdomen with five pairs of unjointed prolegs
(pseudo legs) and a dorsal horn on eighth segment.

The spiracles present on cither side of the abdomen help in gaseous exchange.
The caterpillar is voracious and grows quickly. It sheds its skin four times. At
the time of shedding skin, it does not move and eat at all. The developmental
stage of larva between two successive moultings is called instar larva.

The well grown fifth instar larva starts secreting a sticky fluid from the gland
present on the lateral side of the body. When this fluid comes in contact to the
air, it turns into a long thread called silk. The thread gets wrapped around the

176


body of larva forming a round case called cocoon. The larva changes into
pupa within this cocoon.

Pupa: Pupa is the inactive stage of a silkworm. It does not eat and move at
all. But development of pupa continues inside the cocoon. The prolegs
disappear and two pairs of wings develop on the thorax. Normally, the pupa
becomes adult in 12 to 14 days

In the commercial field, silkworms are reared for producing silk. For this, the
cocoons are treated with hot air or hot water to kill the pupa present inside it.
Heating destroys the adhesive substance of cocoon so that silk can be
extracted easily.

The silk thread obtained in this way is soft, elastic, shiny, strong, long,
durable and light as well. That’s why it is also called queen of the fibres.

Some cocoons are left safe to obtain adults for the continuation of next
generation.

Adult: The pupa develops inside the cocoon into the adult silkworm. It
emerges out by breaking the cocoon. The adult silkworm has 3 pairs of legs
and 2 pairs of wings. It lives for 5 to 6 days. An adult silkworm does not feed
at all. This stage is just for reproduction.

Properties of Silkworm

The clothes made of silk are:

Light and more comfortable.

ii. High resistance to deformation.
iii, Soft and shiny.
iv. Strongest natural fibre.

v. Good insulation properties (warm in winter and cool in summer).

4.

i, Good water absorption and dries quickly.

vii.

Can take any colour.
Uses of Silk
i. Silk is used to make clothes, insulation coil of telephone etc.

ii, The dead pupae obtained while extracting silk thread is highly
nutritious and can be used to feed livestock

177


Activity 14.1

Prepare a chart showing the life cycle of silkworm. Display your chart on the
wall of the in classroom.

HONEY BEES

Introduction: The honey bees are social insects which live in large colonies.
They secrete wax which solidifies on coming in contact with air. The wax is
used by them to form combs. The honcy collected by the honey bees is stored
in the comb. The combs are fixed on the support. The comb serves as a store
house for honey and the birth place of them. Honey producing bees belong to
bombydae, meliponidae and apidae. Different species of apidae are the main
honey producing bees. They are Apis mellifera, Apis florae, Apis dorsata,
Apis indica and Apis adamsoni. The honey bees are trimorphic as they are
found in three different forms in a colony namely queen, drones and workers.

 

Drone bee Queen bee Worker bee
fig.14.3 ‘fig.14.4 ‘fig.14.5
The Queen

The queen is the largest among all honey bees in a colony. It has shorter
wings and elongated and pointed abdomen. The duty of queen bee is to lay
egg and to coordinate all the worker bees and drone bees according to the
necessity of their colony. It produces a typical fragrance from its body which
is known by all the bees of the colony and easily find their way to come back
home during the collection of pollen grains and nectar.

The Drones

The drones are specially for fertilizing female queen and to keep their hive
warm. The individual drone that mates with queen immediately dies after
mating. They are blackish and more hairy, larger than worker bees but smaller

178


than the queen bees. They lack poisonous gland and sacks (pollen basket) to
collect pollen and nectar. They are fed by worker bees.

Workers

Worker bees are the smallest in size. The worker bees work on collecting
nectar and pollen visiting 20-30 flowers in a minute.

They have chewing and lapping type of mouth parts and a poisonous sting at
the end of abdomen. They have pollen basket at their hairy legs. Making
combs, collecting pollens and nectar to make honey, protecting the hives from
enemies, looking after eggs, larvae and pupae etc are the duty of worker bees.

The life cycle of the honey bees completes into four stages:

i Egg
ii, Larva
iii, Pupa
iv. Adult

Eggs: The queen lays about 1500-3000 eggs in a day. The queen chooses
standard worker size cell to release fertilized eggs where worker bees
develop. It chooses wider drone sized cells for developing drones where she
releases unfertilized eggs. The position of cach egg laid in the cell is upright
for the first day; it inclines the next day and lies horizontally on the third day.

 

Life cycle of bee

fig.14.6

179


Larvae: Afier 3-days, eggs are hatched into larvae. The larvae are voracious.
They feed on royal jelly for the first three days but later on they feed on honey
and pollen. It is seen that the larva that is chosen for future queen is given
royal jelly only as food. The larvae shed their skin five times. When they
become fully grown, they are sealed with wax in the cell by the worker bees.

Pupae: A great transformation takes place in this stage. Gradually, it starts
producing eyes, legs and hairs that cover their body. After 7- 14 days, pupae
chew up the wax and come out as adults.

Adults: Workers take 12 days, drones take about 14.5 days and queen takes
about 7.5 days to emerge from pupae. They feed on honey. Similarly, the
drones survive a few weeks to 4 months, workers survive 6-7 weeks and
queen survives about 2-5 years. The workers possess proboscis to extract
nectar. The duration of egg, larva, pupa and adult of all three forms of bees
can be shown in the following table

      

 

 

 

 

Bee Egg | Larva | Pupa Adult Total
Queen | 3days | 5.5 7.Sdays | 2-5 years 2-5 years
days
Drone | 3days | 6days |12days | Upto4month | Upto4
months
Worker | 3days | 6days | 14.5 days | 6-7 weeks Upto7
weeks

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Division of labour according to age of worker bee.

* 1 to 3 days: They are also called infant bees. They are very weak
and fecd on scattered food, they learn to walk and help in cleaning the
comb. They also provide warmer to the comb.

© 4 to 6 days: They feed older larva and themselves with plenty of
honey and pollen.

© 7 to 11 days: Royal gland is developed in their head from where
royal-jelly is produced. The worker bees feed the royal jelly to the
young larva and also feed themselves with plenty of honey and
pollen.

© 12 to 17 days: The royal gland degenerate but 4 pairs of wax- gland
develop and secrete wax. Using the wax, worker bees of this age make

180


new combs and seal the cells with honey and that having filly grown
larvae,

© 18 to 20 days: Wax- glands degenerate but poison gland and sting is
developed. They guard their comb from enemies.

* 21 days: Now they fly out the comb to collect nectar, water, etc
from jungle, gardens and farm lands till their death.

When number of bees in the colony increases beyond its capacity, the worker
bees make new queen bee by feeding only royal- jelly to a selected larva
hatched from the fertilized egg. When new queen bee is made ready a new
colony is formed at the new place.

It is seen that the queen bee flics either only for mating (which is called
mating flight or nuptial flight) or for migration. Otherwise it remains inside
the comb laying eggs and eating honey.

Honey production: The nectar is collected by the worker bees and stores it in
their combs. The nectar then undergoes chemical change to form honey. The
maximum part of sucrose present in nectar gets converted into fructose and
glucose. Hence, the honey contains fructose, glucose, water, amino Acids etc
The honey is the source of vitamins, protein and minerals.

Uses of honey bees

1. Honey produced by honey bees is used as food. Honey is taken in the
form of sweet jelly or in the diluted form with bread, fruits, cereals etc. It
is used to prepare jam, honey cakes, breads, biscuits etc.

2. It is used as a medicine to remove weakness, mental disorder, fatigue,
nervous disorder. It also acts as natural bactericide, removes gastric ulcer,
provides relief from hyper acidity

Bee wax is used to make creams, lotions, face packs etc.

4, During the collection of nectar and pollen, worker bees help in
pollination in flowers by which they help in increasing crop production.

Activity 14.2

Visit a nearby beekeeping farm. Collect the Queen, Drone and Worker bee
Study their external features.

181


Summary

1.

10.
11.

12.

Silkworm and honey bees are the invertebrates which do not have
backbone.

Their body is divisible into head, thorax and abdomen.

There are two types of silkworm mostly reared in the world.

 

i, Seri silkworm ~ feeds on mulberry leaves.
ii. Eri Silkworm - feeds on castor leaves.
Silkworms are unisexual i.e. sexes are separate,

The adult male silkworm dies immediately after mating and _ female
dies after 4-5 days of mating when she lays all eggs.

The larva of silkworm produces silk which is shiny, soft, strong,
highly elastic fibre which is used to make clothes.

The silk is obtained from cocoon by treating it with hot water or hot air.
It kills the pupa inside and silk thread is obtained.

The honey bees in a colony are queen, drones and workers. So they are
trimorphic.

‘The drones are specially for fertilizing female queen.
The queen is only the fertile female in the colony.
The worker bees work on collecting nectar and pollen.

Honey is used as food and as the medicine to cure gastric and nervous
diseases,

fatty

Choose the best alternatives:
How many times does the larva of silkworm moult?
a) 2 times b) 3 times

c) 4 times d) 5 times

182


How are the eggs of silkworm protected when there is the lack of
mulberry leaves?

a) Storing the eggs below 18°C
b) Storing the eggs below 25°C
c) Storing the eggs below 30°C
d) Storing the eggs below 35°C
Which honey bee feeds on royal jelly only?

a) Queen b) Drones

¢) Workers d) a) and b)

Which is the inactive stage of silkworm?

a) Larva b) Pupa

©) Adult d) Egg

How many stages does a honey bee complete in its life cycle?
a)1 b)2 o)4 d)5

Answer the following questions:

1. What are the two types of silkworms reared in Nepal? Mention.
their food too.

2. Mention 4-stages in the life cycle of silkworm.
3. Draw the diagrams showing life cycle of silkworm.

4. In which stage of silkworm, silk is produced? What are the
features of silk thread?

5. What is cocoon? Why is it important?
6. Give reasons:
i) The silk is called queen of fibres.
ii) The eggs of silkworm are kept in cold storage
7. Define instar larva, Which instar larva produces silk?
8. What are the uses of silk in our daily life?
9. Mention different types of honey bees found in the world.
10. Mention the stages in the life cycle of honey bee.
11. What is the food of honeybees? Which honey bees collect nectar?

183


12. Name three different adult honey bees. Write their specific roles in
the colony.

13. Draw the diagrams showing life cycle of honey bees.
14. What are the uses of honey bees?
Project Work

Visit the sites of sericulture and apiculture and study their rearing methods.
Present your observation about rearing silkworms and honey bees in the
classroom,

GLOSSARY
Probosis: an extensible tubular sucking organ
Hive: a place where bees are kept

Metamorphosis: a series of changes in the organisms from egg
to the adult form

Moulting: periodic shedding of the skin

Royal jelly: a highly nutritious food of the queen

Voracious: to eat greedily

Colony: an aggregate of worker bees, drones and a queen living
together in a hive as one social unit

Trimorphic: occurring or having in three different forms

Dioecious: unisexual

Comb: a waxy structure made by honey bees having
numerous hexagonal cells to lay eggs and to store honey
and pollen

184


Human Nervous and
Glandular Systems

Unit 15.

How do you feel when you suddenly touch a hot object? What makes you feel
hot? Which body systems, do you think, are involved in the process of
reaction to heat?

All these things happen in our body due to the presence of sense organs,
nervous system and glandular system. When we touch any hot object, we
remove our hand quickly. It happens because our body responds to the
external stimulus, heat. This response of the body is involuntary. It occurs due
to an integrated coordination among sense organs, nervous system and other
parts of the body. Our brain is the master controller of our body.

 

Similarly, various body activities are coordinated, integrated and regulated by
the hormones produced by endocrine glands. These hormones regulate body
growth, mental development, sexuality and other metabolic activities. In this
chapter, we are going to discuss on the human nervous system and the
glandular system.

NERVOUS SYSTEM

Nervous system is one of the major systems of our body which controls and
coordinates all the body activities. It is made up of billions of nerve cells
called neurons. A neuron is capable of initiating nerve impulse in response to
stimulus and transmitting it. It has made us capable to react to the external
environment. The nervous system gives information of the external
environment through the sense organs. It also regulates the functions of
voluntary and involuntary muscles in a balanced way.

The entire nervous system is divided into 3- parts.
1. Central Nervous System(CNS)

2. Peripheral Nervous System(PNS)

3. Autonomic nervous System(ANS)

Central Nervous System (CNS):

It lies along the mid-dorsal part of the body and consists of brain and spinal
cord.

Brain: Brain is the largest and uppermost part of Central Nervous System. It
is enclosed within the bony structure called cranium. It is covered or protected

185


by three membranes called meninges.
They are duramater, piamater and
arachnoid mater. Duramater is the
outermost layer and piamater is the
innermost layer of the meninges. In
between arachnoid mater and piamater
there is a fluid called cerebrospinal fluid
which protects the brain from injury.

Brain is divided into 3 main parts:

Cerebrum, Cerebellum and Medula oblongata.

 

1.

Cerebrum: It is the largest part of the brain which occupies about 80%
of the whole brain. It extends in frontal, parietal and occipital region. It is
divided into two hemispheres; left and right. Both the hemispheres are
separated by a deep longitudinal fissure. The outer surface of the
cerebrum has convolutions, which increase its surface area. The outer
surface consists of grey matter whereas inner surface consists of white
matter. It controls various activities such as smell, speech, memory,
hearing, touch, excitement, anger, interpretation, etc. It also controls
other parts of the brain. Injury in this part may lead a person towards
coma,

Cerebellum: It is the second largest part of the brain present below the
posterior portion of the cerebrum. It consists of two cerebellar
hemispheres with a central worm shaped part, vermis. It has grey matter
outside and white matter inside. Injury in this part leads to the failure of
voluntary muscles and causes paralysis.

Functions

Dy)
2)

3.

Cerebellum balances the body.

It controls rapid muscular activities like running, typing, talking, etc.

 

Do you know?

Alcohol affects cerebellum and it disturbs muscular activities.

 

 

Medulla oblongata: It is the lowermost part of our brain. It lies just
above the spinal cord. Like cerebrum and cerebellum, it consists of grey
matter and white matter. Injury of this part causes instant death.

 

186

 


Functions:

i. Medulla oblongata receives and integrates signals from spinal cord and
sends resulting signals to the cerebellum.

ii, It controls involuntary functions like vomiting, coughing, sneezing,
swallowing food, breathing, enzyme and hormone secretion, blood
pressure, salivation, etc.

iii. It promotes peristalsis of alimentary canal and dilation of blood vessels.

Spinal cord: Spinal cord is the elongated part
of central nervous system which extends from
the atlas to the first lumbar vertebrae. Its
outer part consists of white matter and inner
part consists of grey matter. It is protected by
a bony structure called vertebral column. The
white matter in outer part gives shiny
appearance to the spinal cord. It is also
protected by meninges and cerebrospinal
fluid. Any damage or injury to the spinal cord
causes paralysis of the lower parts.

Functions

 

1) Spinal cord conducts reflex actions.

2) It connects various body parts with the brain.

Peripheral nervous system

The Peripheral nervous system consist 12 pairs of cranial nerves and 31 pairs
of spinal nerves. They connect central nervous system with the organs and
muscles. The cranial nerves arise from the brain and spinal nerves arise from
the spinal cord. Cranial nerves are sensory, motor and mixed type. They
communicate eye, nose, tongue, ear etc. to the brain. Spinal nerve tissues are
responsible for conducting impulse between various parts of the body and
brain, They are mixed type of nerves.

Autonomic nervous system

Autonomic nervous system is an involuntary part of the nervous system. It
controls the involuntary activities of the various organs like secretion of
enzymes for food digestion. The secretion of enzymes is autonomic function.
This nervous system is divided into two parts.

1) Sympathetic nervous system

187


2) Parasympathetic nervous system

Sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system are opposite in nature.
Sympathetic nervous system increases blood pressure; heart beat rate at the
time of sudden incidents and parasympathetic nervous system normalizes the
situations.

Activity 15.1

Prepare a model of central nervous system by using clay soil. Colour it.
Display it in the classroom.

Neuron: A neuron or a nerve cell is the structural and functional unit of
nervous system, Human nervous system has about 100 billion neurons. A
neuron consist single cell body (soma) which has 5 to 7 small branches called
dendrites and a long branch called axon like a typical cell, the cell body
(soma) consists nucleus, cytoplasm and cell membrane (neuroplasm). Cyton is
concerned with metabolic maintenance and growth.

The dendrites are the short branches of a neuron which are responsible to
receive nerve impulse. They receive impulse and send towards the cell body.

Axons are myelinated or non myelinated. They conduct nerve impulse away
from the cell body and pass to the dendrites of next neuron. Myclinated axons
have periodic constriction and in these areas myelin sheath is absent. Such
areas are called nodes of ranvier. The axon ends in a group of branches called
the axon terminals.

On the basis of their functions, neurons are of three types:

1. Sensory neuron or afferent deville:
neuron: sensory neuron transmit
impulses from various body parts
to the central nervous system i.e.
to the spinal cord and brain. ove ot tomar

colt body,

2. Motor neuron or efferent she
neuron: Motor nerves carry
impulse from central neuron
system to the peripheral region of
the body.

: 1 ter meron
3. Interneuron: Interneuron convert ' ,
sensory impulse to the motor ca ee aie

impulse

 

Fig.: 15.3 showing neurons

188


Synapses
The axon of a neuron branches into minute filaments which, terminates in
small swellings (synaptic knobs) which are very close to the dendrites and the
cell body of next neuron. Hence, the minute gap between synaptic knob of a
neuron and dendrites and cell body of a next neuron is called synapse.

Ganglion

The collection of cell bodies or cytons is called ganglion. It communicates
with the brain and spinal cord to regulate involuntary function.

Glandular system

When we see or hear any sour food material, salivation occurs. The saliva is
released from the salivary gland in our mouth. Likewise, tear gland (lacrimal
gland) secretes tear, when dust enters into the eyes.

There are many tissues and organs in the body which secretes such fluids

mostly in the form of hormones and enzymes. This group of tissues and
organs which secrete enzymes and hormones is called glandular system.

There are two types of glands classified on the basis of presence or absence of
duets,

1) Exocrine glands
2) Endocrine glands

1) Exocrine glands: These are the ducted glands which secrete enzymes
for various metabolic activities. Their secretions are carried to the target
organs through the duct. Examples: salivary glands, pancreas, etc.

2) Endocrine glands: These are the ductless glands which secretes
hormones. They are responsible for controlling and regulating various
body activities. Their secretions are directly passed into the blood stream
to reach the specific organ.

A hormone is a chemical substance which control, coordinate and
integrates various physiological processes and activities of the body. So,
hormones are called chemical messengers

Differences between exocrine and endocrine gland:

 

Exocrine gland Endocrine gland

 

Exocrine gland is a ducted gland. | Endocrine is a non -ducted gland.

 

 

 

 

189


 

It produces enzymes. It produces hormones.

 

The secretion is passed into the

The secretion is carried to the .
6 blood stream and reaches to specific

target part through duct.

 

 

 

 

part.
Gland and its target part are Glands and the target parts may or
closer. may not be closer.

 

‘The endocrine glands present in the human body are given below:

1) Pituitary gland Hypobstams

   

2) Thyroid gland Hypotelamus:

Pry gard Peustry dre
3) Parathyroid gland

et 080 peeping Tnyed gene

ae ne
4) Adrenal gland TWH os
5) Pancreas

steal acs deal ans
6) Gonads Panceas Poreeas
omy
res

tie Fede
Fig.: 15.4 endocrine glands

Pituitary gland (Master gland): The pituitary gland is located below the

hypothalamus of the brain. It is small pea sized gland attached to the brain by

a stalk, the infundibulum. It has three lobes namely anterior, intermediate and
posterior.

Pituitary gland secretes two types of hormones:
i. Tropic hormone or stimulating hormone
ii, Non tropic hormone or growth hormone

The tropic hormone is also called stimulating hormone which stimulates other
glands for their secretions. For example, Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)
or thyrotrophic which controls the activity of thyroid gland. Other examples
are: follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), prolactin
hormone, etc.

The growth hormone (GH) or somatotrophin stimulates growth of the body.
Hyper secretion of growth hormone causes gigantism during childhood and in

190


adults. It causes acromegaly (enlargement of the bones of hand, feet and face).
Hypo- secretion of GH causes dwarfism in the children.

Thyroid gland: Thyroid gland is a largest gland and is bilobed and located on
the either side of trachea, The hormones secreted by thyroid glands are
thyroxin, tri-iodothyroxin, thyrocalcitonin (TCT).

The thyroid hormones are responsible for regulating the metabolic rate of the
body, stimulate protein synthesis, maintain body temperature, and suppress
the release of calcium ions from the bones and accelerate mental
development. Thyroxin is rich in iodine. It helps in normal growth and
development of the body.

Hyper secretion of thyroid hormone causes exophthalmic goiter which is
characterized by protrusion of the eye balls, weight loss, increased body
temperature, increased heart beat rate, restlessness, increased appetite, etc.

Hypothyroidism i.e. less secretion of thyroid hormone causes cretinism in the
children characterized by physical and mental retardation, potbelly, slow
heartbeat, lower blood pressure, etc. It may also cause myxoedema or gull’s
disease in the adult. It is characterized by the dry skin, the lack of alertness,
intelligence and initiative, low blood pressure, retarded sexual development.
Similarly it may cause simple goiter mostly in the people of hilly areas. It is
characterized by the thyroid enlargement. It occurs due to the deficiency of
iodine in food.

Parathyroid glands: These glands are four in number and are located on the
posterior surface of thyroid glands. The hormone secreted by this gland is
Parathyroid hormone or parathormone. This hormone regulates the amount of
calcium and phosphate in the blood.

Hyperparathyroidism stimulates the release of more calcium from the bones.
It results softening of bones. Also bones become porous and weak. This
disorder is called osteoporosis. They easily get fractured. It may also cause
the deposition of excess calcium in the soft parts of the body like kidneys in
the form of stone.

Similarly, Hypothyroidism causes significant decrease in the calcium level,
which causes the convulsions and cramps of muscles. This disorder is
hypocalcaemic tetany or parathyroid tetany.

Adrenal Glands: These glands are two in number each located at the top of
each kidney. Each adrenal gland has outer adrenal cortex and inner adrenal
medulla. The hormones produced by this gland are adrenaline and nor-
adrenaline and cortisone. They prepare the body for various functions. Nor-

191


adrenaline maintains or regulates blood pressure under normal conditions.
Adrenaline prepares the body daring to face the emergency situations. It
increases heart beat rate at the time of emergency. Cortisone regulates the
metabolism of fat, protein and carbohydrate to address stress. The hyper
secretion of adrenaline increases the high blood pressure, heart beat rate but
hypo secretion of adrenaline causes weakness, lower blood pressure, nausea,
vomiting, unconsciousness etc.

Pancreas: Pancreas is present in the abdominal region and has both endocrine
and exocrine functions, so, it is also called heterocrine gland or mixed gland.
The endocrine part consists of islets of langerhans, which secrete insulin and
glucagon hormones.

By the combined effect of insulin and glucagon blood sugar level is
maintained, Glucagon stimulates the liver to change glycogen into glucose.
But insulin reduces the blood sugar level by converting glucose into glycogen
and helps body cells to consume glucose to liberate energy. So, insulin and
glucagon are just opposite in function.

Hyper secretion of insulin causes hypoglycemia characterized by weakness,
profuse sweating, confusion, unconsciousness, convulsions and hunger.

Hypo secretion of insulin causes diabetes mellitus (Hyperglycemia)
characterized by more glucose level in the blood than the normal range,
excessive urination, dehydration, intense(excessive) thirst, low healing power
etc.

Gonads: Gonads are the sex glands called ovaries and testes in female and
male, respectively. The chief hormones secreted by ovaries are oestrogen and
progesterone, Oestrogen stimulates the development of secondary sexual
characteristics in female like enlargement of breast, growth of pubic hair etc.
and progesterone prepares the female body for pregnancy. Testosterone is the
male hormone. Testosterone stimulates the development of secondary sexual
characteristics in males like facial hair (beard, moustache), hoarse voice,
pubic hair, etc.

Activity 15.2

Sketch a chart showing the various endocrine glands of human beings. Locate
their position in the human body.

192


Summary

1.

The entire nervous system is divided into 3 parts. Central Nervous
System (CNS), Peripheral Nervous System (PNS) and Autonomic
nervous System (ANS).

Brain is the largest and uppermost part of the Central Nervous
System.

A neuron or a nerve cell is the structural and functional unit of the
nervous system.

A neuron consists of single cell body (soma) which has 5 to 7 small
branches called dendrites and a long branch called axon.

The minute gap between synaptic knob of a neuron and dendrites and
cell body of a next neuron is called synapse.

The Peripheral nervous system consists 12 pairs of cranial nerves and
31 pairs of spinal nerves.

‘Autonomic nervous system is an involuntary part of the nervous
system.

There are two types of glands classified on the basis of presence or
absence of ducts, exocrine glands and endocrine glands.

Pituitary gland is also called a master gland as it controls and regulates
the secretion of other glands.

Thyroid gland secretes thyroxine hormone which regulates
metabolism in the body

Parathyroid gland secretes parathormone which balances the calcium
and phosphate salt between bone and blood.

Pancreas is called mixed gland because it produces both engymes and
hormones.

Adrenal secretes adrenaline which prepares a person to face
emergencies.

Gonads secrete sex hormones which develop secondary sexual
characteristics in males and females.

193


od

 

A. Choose the best alternatives.

)

2)

3)

4)

5)

Which gland is called the master gland?
a) pituitary gland b) adrenal gland
©) gonads d) pancreas
Insulin is secreted by

a) pituitary gland b) pancreas

©) gonads d) adrenal

Which nerve carry impulse from various body parts to the central
nervous system?

a) sensory nerve b) motor nerve

c) both (a) and (b) d) intermediate nerve

Which is the middle layer of meninges?

a) duramater b) piamater

©) arachnoid d) sphenoid

In how many parts human nervous system is divided?

a)2 b)3

°)4 46

Answer the following questions.
1) What is a neuron? Mention its types.
2) What is the function of cerebrospinal fluid in the body?
3) Why is pancreas called a heterocrine gland?
4) Write the functions of cerebrum and cerebellum?
5) What are the symptoms of diabetes?
6) Differentiate between
i) — dendrites and axon
ii) hormones and enzymes

iii) spinal and cranial nerves

194


7) Give reasons:
i) Pituitary gland is called master gland
ii) Adrenaline hormone is an emergency hormone

8) How does the combined effect of insulin and glucagon maintain
sugar level in the blood?

9) What happens when the following hormones are more or less inthe

body?
i) growth hormone ii) insulin
iii) parathyroid iv) testosterone

Project work

Study the model of human nervous system in the laboratory of your school
and discuss the functions of various parts with your friends.

GLOSSARY

Atlas: first cervical vertebra

Cerebrospinal fluid: fluid which is present in between arachnoid
mater and piamater that protects brain and
spinal cord

Cranium: a bony structure that protects the brain

Ganglion: collection of cell bodies around the spinal cord
and brain

Grey matter: a collection of dendrites and cell bodies

Neuron: a basic unit of nervous system

White matter: a collection of axons

195


Unit 16 Blood Circulation in
Human Body

What will happen if oxygen, nutrients, and hormones do not reach our body
cells? Which body system is involved in the process of supplying these
substances? What, do you think, will happen to life if there is not sufficient
supply of these substances to the body cells?

Actually, all the nutrients, gases and hormones are transported to the entire
body cells through blood. All these things are life-supportive. Blood is the
main component of circulatory system of our body. The circulatory system
also returns excretory materials produced in the body to the excretory parts.
This system consists of blood, blood vessels and heart.

Blood Circulatory System

| | |

 

 

 

 

Blood Blood Vessels Heart
v ¥ My ¥ t t
Plasma Blood cells ATeries. Veins Capillaries Auricles Ventricles
y

 

  

RBCs WI Platelets
(Erythrocytes) (Leucocytes)—(Thrombocytes)

Blood flows in the blood vessels and carries necessary gases, nutrients,
hormones etc. and is continuously pumped by heart. This type of blood
circulation is called closed circulatory system. Arteries distribute pure
(oxygenated) blood to various parts of the body and veins return
deoxygenated blood to the heart.

196


Structure of blood
Red blood col

Blood is the fluid connective tissue that contains
plasma and cells or blood corpuscles. It is
slightly alkaline fluid with pH 7.4. It supplies all
the necessary materials required for the life
Blood contains blood plasma (55%) and blood
cells (45%). A healthy adult person has about 5.5
litre blood.

White blood cat
Plasma

Pistatets

 

Fig.: 16.1 structure of blood
Blood plasma

It is the yellowish substance that contains 90% water and 10% organic and
inorganic substances. The organic substances present in plasma are protein,
carbohydrate, fat etc. and inorganic matters like salts.

Function of plasma
i. Plasma regulates the amount of water in the blood.

ii, It transports absorbed food materials and oxygen into various parts of the
body.

iii, It carries urea from liver to the kidneys for removal.
iv. It transports hormones secreted by endocrine glands.

v. The proteins present in the plasma are albumin, globulin and _ fibrinogen.
Fibrinogen helps in clotting of blood.

vi. Plasma contains anti coagulant substance called heparin which prevents
blood clotting inside the blood vessels.

Blood cells or blood corpuscles:

There are three types of blood cells. Blood cells remain floating in the blood

plasma. The three types of blood cells are:

a) Erythrocytes or RBCs

b) Leucocytes or WBCs

c) Thrombocytes or platelets

a) Erythrocytes or RBCs: Erythrocytes are non-nucleated, biconcave _ or
circular blood cells which transport gases (O2 and CO:) in the blood. The
number of RBCs per cubic mm of blood is about 45 lakh to 50 lakh.
Their life span is about 90 to 120 days. It has been found that about 20

lakh RBCs are being destroyed in the liver and spleen and are formed in
the bone marrow in every second.

197


b)

A ted pigment called haemoglobin is found in the red blood cells. It
contains iron. It absorbs sufficient oxygen from lungs and transports
throughout the body in the form of oxyhaemoglobin.

The absence of adequate number of RBCs in the blood causes anaemia.
In such condition, a person feels tired even after a short walk.

Leucocytes or WBCs: WBCs are large sized nucleated blood cells.
They are formed in the bone marrow, lymph nodes, spleen. Their
number is 4000-10000 per cubic mm of circulating blood. WBCs are
round or irregular shaped and can change their shape like amoeba. This
changeable body shape enables them to squceze out from the wall of
capillaries during the attack of germs. WBCs are colourless. The life span
of WBC is about two weeks

There are two types of leucocytes:
i) Granular leucocytes
ii) Agranular leucocytes

Granular leucocytes: Granular leucocytes contain granules in their
cytoplasm. They are of three different types: Eosinophils, Basophils and
neutrophils. Eosinophils are non-phagocytic. The main function of
eosinophil is to destroy toxins. Basophils are least in number among the
leucocytes. They release heparin, serotonin, etc. They are mostly amoeba
like and ingest small particles like carbon. Neutrophill are the largest in
number among all the leucocytes. They engulf germs and are called
phagocytes

Agranular leucocytes: Agranular leucocytes lack granules in their
cytoplasm. There are two types of agranular leucocytes. i.e. lymphocytes
and monocytes. Lymphocytes produce antibodies to destroy germs.
They also help in healing injury. They are smaller in size. Monocytes are
the largest leucocytes. They are motile and phagocytic in nature which
engulf bacteria.

c) Thrombocytes or platelets

Platelets are non-nucleated and oval shaped blood cells. These are
formed from the large cells of bone marrow. The life span platelets is
about 2 to 3 days. Their number in per cubic mm of the blood is 2 lakh to
4 lakh.

198


Platelets are responsible for blood clotting at the site of injury or cut. At
the site of injury or cut, they produce a chemical called thromboplastin
which helps in the clotting of blood.

Excess of platelets in the blood is called thrombocytosis and decrease in
the number of platelets causes thrombocytopenia. Platelets are the
fragments of the cells rather than true cells.

Functions of blood

 

Transportation: Blood supplies oxygen from lungs to body cells
and carbon dioxide from the cells to the lungs for removal. The
absorbed nutrients are transported to the body cells and tissues. The
hormones produced by various endocrine glands are transported to
target parts. Likewise, it carries unwanted materials to the liver,
lungs, kidney for their removal.

Regulation: Blood regulates the body temperature. It regulates the
amount of fluids and various chemicals in the tissues.

Protection: Blood destroys toxic substances and disease causing
germs. It maintains immunity power of the body. Fibrinogen along
with thromboplastin present in the blood helps in blood clotting at
the site of cut or injury.

Activity 16.1

i.

Prick your fingertip with a sterilized needle in the presence of your
subject teacher.

Put a drop of blood on the slide.
Spread the blood with the help of another slide and let it be dried.

Put a drop of Leishman stain on it and leave it untouched for 5
minutes and then rinse the slide with water. Dry it again.

v. Observe the blood under the microscope and identify RBC, WBC
and Platelets.
Blood Vessels

 

Mainly there are three types of blood vessels. Endothelium smooth musclt ©"

They are arteries, veins, and capillaries. Blood
flows from the heart to various body parts
through arteries. The arteries divide and
redivide to form capillaries which supply blood
to various body cells. The capillaries unite to

 

199

  


form venules and ultimately the vennules unite to form veins. Veins return
deoxygenated blood the heart.

Arteries: Arteries are thick walled blood vessels that usually supply
oxygenated blood from the heart to the different parts of the body. Thicker
muscular wall of arteries resist higher blood pressure. The wall of the arteries
is three layered: outermost connective tissue, middle smooth muscle and
innermost endothelium.

The arteries are formed by the branching of aorta. The aorta divides into
arteries which further divide to form arterioles. The arterioles are divided into
a network of fine vessels called capillaries. Any damage or injury in the
arteries may cause death of a person.

Veins: Veins are thin walled blood vessels that return deoxygenated blood
from various body parts to the right auricle of the heart. Blood pressure is low
in the veins. They have valves which help to pass the blood in the forward
direction. The wall of veins is also formed of three layers as that of the
arteries.

Capillaries: Capillaries are the fine network of the blood vessels which
connect arteries and veins. Their wall is formed by a single layer of
endothelial cells. This extra thin wall of capillaries helps them to exchange
gases, nutrients and waste materials between the cells and the blood.

  
 

Heart

The heart is a muscular organ which

pumps blood throughout the body. It is Pulmonary artery
made of cardiac muscles. It lies in the tetsu
thoracic cavity and is enclosed within a Right atrium a Mitral valve
pericardium, In between the two layers Of pi... vahe ~ ponte valve
pericardium pericardial fluid is present “Tycuspid vaive WY ~ Let enticue

which protects the heart from injury. It
makes the frictionless movement of the
heart. The heart has two upper chambers
called auricles or atrium and two lower chambers called ventricles. Auricles
are thin walled whereas ventricles are thick walled. Thicker wall of ventricles
provide sufficient force to pump the blood at the greater distance in the body.

 

Auricles are separated from each other by a vertical septum called interatrial
septum. The auricles are separated from ventricles by atrio- ventricular
septum. Similarly, ventricles are separated from each other by inter
ventricular septum. Left ventricle is thicker than right ventricle. The thicker
wall of left ventricle provides sufficient force to pump the blood throughout

200


the body. Right ventricle only pumps the blood to the lungs. Coronary arteries
present there to supply pure blood to the heart muscles.

There are four valves in the heart:

i. Tricuspid valve: Tricuspid valve is located between right auricle and
right ventricle. It has three muscular flaps. Blood passes from right
auricle to the right ventricle through this valve. When the right ventricle
contracts, tricuspid valve closes and blood passes towards lungs through
pulmonary artery.

ii. Bicuspid valve: Bicuspid valve lies between the left auricle and left
ventricle. It has two muscular flaps. Oxygenated blood comes from the
lungs through four pulmonary veins to the left auricle. When left auricle
contract ,the bicuspid valve open and blood from left auricle passes to
left ventricle.Similarly,when left ventricle contracts, bicuspid valve
closes and blood passes towards aorta.

iii, Pulmonic valve: Pulmonic valve is present at the opening of pulmonary
artery. The pulmonary artery arises from the right ventricle. When right
ventricle contracts, this valve opens and blood passes towards the lungs.
It is semilunar shaped.

iv. Aortic valve: Aortic valve is present at the opening of aorta. The aorta
arises from the left ventricle. When left ventricle contracts, aortic valve
opens and oxygenated blood passes to the whole body parts through
aorta.

ry 16.2

Observation of the heart structures

 

Take the heart of goat from meat shop and cut it longitudinally, observe the
following structures.

a. Auricles and ventricles
b. Tricuspid, bicuspid, pulmonary and aortic valve
Blood Circulation

The superior and inferior venacava pour deoxygenated blood to the right
auricle, Superior venacava returns deoxygenated blood from head, neck and
upper limbs to the right auricle whereas inferior venacava returns
deoxygenated blood from the lower parts of the body.

The deoxygenated blood from right auricle passes to the right ventricle
through tricuspid valve. Later, the right ventricle contracts and blood passes to

201


the lungs through pulmonary arteries for purification. The purified
(oxygenated) blood returns back to the left auricle through pulmonary veins.
When the left auricle contracts, blood passes to the left ventricle through
bicuspid valve. On the contraction of the left ventricle aortic valve opens and
oxygenated blood passes to the entire body through aorta.

Pulmonary Circulation (Heart lung circulation) and Systematic
Circulation (Body Circulation)

 

Fig.: 16.4 blood circulation

Circulation of blood between heart and lungs through pulmonary arteries and
pulmonary veins is called pulmonary circulation. It occurs to purify the
deoxygenated blood in the lungs.

Systemic circulation is the circulation of blood between the heart and different
body systems through arteries and veins. It occurs in the body to supply
oxygenated blood to the whole body through aorta. The deoxygenated blood
produced in the various body tissues and organs returns back to the heart
through veins.

Heart beat: The rhythmic contraction and relaxation of the heart is called
heart beat. Each heart beat has one contraction phase (systolic phase) and
relaxation phase (diastolic phase). Human heart beats about 70 — 80 times per
minute i.e. in average 72 times. Heart beats faster during sickness, exercise,
fear, excitement etc.

202


Blood Pressure: The force exerted by the flowing blood on the wall of blood
vessels is called blood pressure. In a normal person, blood pressure is about
120/80 mm of Hg.

When the ventricles contract blood pressure in the arteries increases and this
maximum blood pressure is called systolic blood pressure. But when
ventricles relax, blood pressure in the arteries decreases. This minimum blood
pressure observed in the arteries during the relaxation of ventricles is called
diastolic blood pressure. In a healthy person, systolic blood pressure is 120
mm of Hg and diastolic blood pressure is 80 mm of Hg. Blood pressure is
measured by an instrument called sphygmomanometer.

High Blood Pressure (Hypertension)

The blood pressure of 120/80 mm of Hg is considered as a normal blood
pressure. Sometimes it increases and its level reaches beyond 140mm of Hg
(systolic) and 90 mm of Hg (diastolic). It is considered high blood pressure.
High blood pressure is very dangerous as it may damage heart, brain, kidneys
ete.

Causes

i. A diet full of oily products
ii, Tobacco smoking

iii, Mental tension

iv. Kidney disorder

v. Lack of physical exercise
vi. Salty food

vii. Alcohol

viii. Age above 40 years

ix, Adrenal and thyroid disorder
x. Genetic reasons
Symptoms

1) Headache

2) Dizziness

3) Blurred vision

4) Chest pain

203


5) Short breathes
Preventive measures

Since high blood pressure is a dangerous body condition, one should be
highly conscious in the daily activities. Balanced dict helps to maintain
normal blood pressure. Oily and spicy foods should be avoided. Positive
thinking, disciplined behavior, regular physical exercise and regular health
check up help to balance normal blood pressure.

Diabetes

Diabetes is caused due to the deficiency of insulin in the body. Insulin deficit
causes the increased glucose level in the blood. So, this disease is also called
the disease of sugar. Insulin secreted by pancreas controls blood sugar level.

Causes of diabetes

1) Insufficient insulin production

2) Genetic reason

3) Stressful life style ete.

Symptoms

- Intense thirst

- Increased appetite

- Dizziness

- Unconsciousness

- Vision disorder

- Delay of wound healing ete.
Preventive measures

- Stress free daily activities

- Consumption of balanced diet

- Reducing body weight

- Stop taking alcohol, drugs, smoking
- Consuming green vegetables and fruits
- Regular physical exercise

- Having Sufficient water

204


Uric Acid

Uric acid is a chemical created when the body breaks down purines. Purines
are found in meat produets, pulses, beer etc. The breakdown of purines in the
foods that we cat results in the release of uric acid as a biproduct. Most uric
acid dissolves in blood and passes to the kidneys. If the body produces too
much uric acid and cannot be removed from the body, a person suffers from
uric acid. The high level of uric acid in the blood is called hyperuricemia.

Hyperuricemia is a condition of an excessive amount of uric acid in the blood
stream. Normally, uric acid is transported through blood to the kidneys and is
climinated in the urine. Accumulation of uric acid in the blood is either due to
failure to excrete uric acid or increased production of uric acid.

Causes

i. Hypothyroidism, obesity, leukaemia

ii. High level of caffeine and alcohol consumption.

iii, Excessive consumption of meat products, pulses, beers ete.
Symptoms

i, Development of gout- It happens due to the accumulation of uric
acid in the joint. It causes pain at the joints even in the minimal pressure.

ii, Kidney stone and kidney failure
iii, Hypertension

iv. Heart problem

Preventive measures

i, Reducing the intake of purine containing foods like meat and meat
products, sea food, legumes, ete.

ii, Frequently having strawberries and drinking black cherry juice.

iii. Taking sufficient water and have regular physical exercise.

Summary

1) The circulatory system is the main transport system that supplies oxygen,
nutrients, hormones, etc. to the different body cells and returns excretory
materials to the excretory parts.

2) Blood is the fluid connective tissue that contains plasma and cells or
blood corpuscles,

205


3)

4)
5)

6)
1
8)
9)

10)

11)
12

The three types of blood cells are: Erythrocytes or RBCs, Leucocytes or
WBCs and thrombocytes or platelets.

A red pigment called haemoglobin is found in the red blood cells.

Mainly there are three types of blood vessels. They are arteries, veins and
capillaries.

The heart has two upper chambers called auricles and two lower
chambers called ventricles.

Circulation of blood between heart and lungs through pulmonary arteries
and pulmonary veins is called pulmonary circulation.

Systemic Circulation is the circulation of blood between the heart and
different body systems through arteries and veins.

The rhythmic contraction and relaxation of the heart is called heart beat.

The force exerted by the flowing blood on the wall of blood vessels is
called blood pressure, In a normal person, blood pressure is about 120/80
mm of Hg.

Diabetes is caused due to the deficiency of insulin in the body.

Hyperuricemia is a condition of an excessive amount of uric acid in the
blood stream.

web)

a)
1.

Choose the best alternatives.

Which blood vessels have valves?

a) capillaries _b) arterioles c) veins d) arteries
How many chambers are there in human heart?

a)2 b)3 o)4 as

The heart is covered by the membranes called:

a) meninges b) pericardium

c) pleura d) piameter

Which blood vessels carry blood away from the heart?

a) arteries b) veins

206


©) both a) and b) d) capillaries

5. Excessive number of WBCs in the blood causes

a) leukemia b) anaemia

c) leucopenia d) tetany

B) Answer the following questions:

b
2)
3)
4)
5)

6)

nD

8)

9)

What do you mean by circulatory system?
Name the valves present in the human heart.
What is blood? Name its components.
Write the two functions of blood.
Differentiate between:

a) pulmonary artery and pulmonary vein

b) veins and arteries

c) auricles and ventricles

Draw a neat and labeled diagram of the internal structure of
human heart.

Give reasons:

a) Left ventricle is thicker than the right ventricle of the heart.
b) Arteries are thicker than veins.

c) Veins have valves.

Mentions the symptoms and preventive measure of uric acid and
diabetes.

Define systolic and diastolic blood pressure. The blood pressure of a
person is 140/100 mm of Hg, what does it mean?

10) Mention three types of blood cells and their functions.

11) Why is blood plasma important? Name the proteins found in it.

Project work

Prepare a questionnaire about diabetes that helps to find patients of it and their
present condition and visit to the community near to your school. Collect the
data and finally prepare a report and submit it to your subject teacher.

207


GLOSSARY

Bicuspid valves:

Bone marrow:

Diabetes:

Tricuspid valve:

valve present with two flaps which is present
between left auricle and left ventricle

a thick fluid present in the long bones where
blood cells are formed

increased level of sugar in the blood.

valve present between right auricle and right
ventricle which has three flaps

208


Chromosome and Sex
Determination

Unit 17

You must have noticed organisms producing off-springs of their own kind.
Which component, do you think, is responsible to make this possible, and to
determine the sex of animals? Discuss in groups.

 

Every organism produces off-springs of its own kind. Human beings
reproduce human beings: cats reproduce cats and so on. This phenomenon
tells us that the off-springs resemble their parents. This occurs due to the
transmission of characters from one generation to the next generation through
chromosomes present in the gametes (sperm and ovum) of the parents.

A chromosome consists of tiny structures called genes which are the segments
of DNA molecule. They carry hereditary characters. Chromosomes not only
transfer the hereditary characters but also determine sex of an individual.
Change in the number of chromosomes causes various disorders in the body.

Secondary comsinicion 2 ‘Two chromonemate

= 2

oan ni
:

   

Chromosome

Nucleus of the body cell of an organism
(plant or animal) consists of a network
of fine threads of chromatin fibres. The
chromatin fibres become thicker and
shorter during the division of cell.

  
    

A chromosome is composed of DNA
and histone protein. The constriction in

the chromosome is called centromere.  gyonscvesnaie | Centtmere
The centromere divides the chromosome _ § fétealy coled chomonemate
into two arms. The arms of
chromosomes are called chromatids.

On the basis of position of centromere,
chromosomes are of four different types. Gruaome sina pias

   

 

 

Metacentric chromosome

Fig.: 17.1 lype of chromosomes

 

ii. Sub -metacentric chromosome
iii, Acrocentric chromosome

iv. Telocentric chromosome

209


iii.

Metacentric chromosome: In this type of chromosomes, centromere
remains at the centre of a chromosome. It divides the arms of the
chromosomes equally into two halves.

Sub-Metacentric chromosome: In this type of chromosomes,
centromere is near one side which divides the chromosomes into two
unequal halves.

Acrocentric chromosome: In this type of chromosomes, centromere lies
near one end. It forms a very small arm beyond centromere.

Telocentric chromosome: In this type of chromosomes, centromere lies
at the extreme end and hence there is a single arm.

Number of chromosomes in different organisms

Due to the difference in the number of chromosomes in different organisms,
the organisms possess varied morphological features. It is seen that the
number of chromosomes in somatic cells or vegetative cells is diploid (2n)
while the number of chromosomes in a reproductive cell or gamete is haploid
(n). In the higher organisms in which sexual reproduction takes place, diploid
zygote is formed by the fusion of two haploid gametes of opposite sex each
from father and mother. The diploid zygote divides by mitosis process
maintaining the diploid chromosomes in each body cell.

The number of chromosomes in different organisms is given below.

i,
ii.
iii.

iv.

xii.

Human beings ~ 46
Housefly — 12

Frog — 26 \ Vv ]
Gorilla — 48
Onion = 16 Centamere
i. Pine — 24
. Horse — 64

Rice —24 Metacentic Submetacentic Acroventic Telecentre
Sugarcane — 80 Fig.: 17.2

Potato ~ 48

Dog-78

Solanum-16

210


Importance of chromosomes
i. Chromosomes are the sites for genes which carry hereditary characters.
ii, They play an important role in cell division, cell growth and cell repair.
Activity 17.1

Draw a neat diagram of a chromosome and label centromere and chromatid.

Sex Determination

Chromosomes are located in the nucleus of a
cell. On the basis of the function, there are CI
two types of chromosomes; autosomes and

sex chromosomes. Autosomes determine Aeexy 44 4H
various body features and sex chromosomes
determine the sex of an individual.

Sex determination is a biological system
which determines the development of sexual
characters in an organism. Generally, there
are two sexes in the sexually reproducing
organisms namely male and female.

  

In the human body, 23 pairs of

chromosomes are present in each nucleus of = oo aaexy 444x¥
ana 95 rain MAXX AME XX

somatic cell. Out of them first 22 pairs of the “Rate andx¥ male machaism of

chromosomes are autosomes and 23™ pair is Fig. 17.3

sex chromosomes. XY pair is the sex

chromosome in males and XX pair is the sex chromosomes in females.

 
   

oa

At the time of sperm formation, 50% of the total sperms produced contain X
chromosome and 50% of the sperms contain Y chromosome. But all the ova
produced contain X chromosome.

After copulation, if X chromosome containing sperm (male gamete) fuses
with X chromosome containing ovum (female gamete), a baby girl is
produced. If Y chromosome containing male gamete fuses with X-
chromosome containing female gamete, a baby boy is produced.
Chromosomal disorder

Chromosomes transfer hereditary characters from the parents to their off-
springs. A chromosome is formed of many genes. A gene is the functional
segment of DNA. Each gene possesses a specific hereditary character.

241


The disorder in the body caused due to change in the number of chromosomes.
is called chromosomal disorder.

Some examples of the chromosomal disorder are.

i.

ii.

iii.

i

iii.

Down’s Syndrome
Klinefelter’s Syndrome
Turner’s Syndrome

Down’s Syndrome (47, XY, +21) or (47, XX, +21): Down's syndrome
was first studied by John Langdon Down. It is a developmental disorder
caused by an extra number of 21° autosome. So, it is also called trisomy
21.

People with Down's syndrome have a flat face, a small broad nose, a
large furrow tongue, and upward slanting eyes. That has an increased risk
of respiratory infection, leukaemia, heart diseases, etc.

Klinefelter’s Syndrome (47, XXY): Klinefelter is a genetic disorder
caused when a person gets two X- chromosomes and one Y
chromosome. Mostly, such individuals develop as males.

Klinefelter's Syndrome is characterized by longer arms, legs, more fat,
wider hips, learning disability, abnormally tall.

Turner’s Syndrome (45, XO): It was first described by Dr. Henry

turner. It is a syndrome caused due to incomplete X- chromosome.
Mostly, such individuals develop as females.

Turner’s syndrome is characterized by shorter body structure, less
developed ovaries, short neck, etc.

Summary

1.
2.

A chromosome consists of the tiny structures called genes.

On the basis of position of centromere, chromosomes are of four
different types:

metacentric Chromosome
sub-metacentric Chromosome
iii, acrocentric Chromosome

 

iv. telocentric Chromosome

212


 

The number of chromosomes in somatic cells or vegetative cells is
diploid (2n) whereas the number of chromosomes in a reproductive
cell or gamete is haploid (n).

Autosomes determine various body features and sex chromosomes
determine the sex of an individual.

The disorder in the body caused due to change in the number of
chromosomes is called chromosomal disorder.

Choose the best alternatives.
How many chromosomes are found in a cell of sugarcane?

a) 20 pairs b) 25 pairs

c) 40 pairs d) 30 pairs

On the basis of the position of centromere, chromosomes are of :
a) 2 types b) 3 types

©) 4 types d) 5 types

What is the sex determining chromosome called?

a) Sex chromosome b) Autosome

c) Chromatid d) Centromere

Which syndrome is observed due to the lack of one X- chromosome?
a) Down’s syndrome b) Klinefelter’s syndrome

c) Turner’s syndrome d) Deficiency syndrome

How many chromosomes are found in a human cell?

a) 46 b) 48

©) 44 d)50

Answer the following questions.
1. What is a chromosome? What are its constituents?
Mention four types of chromosomes and define them.
What is a gene? Write its location and funciton?

Write the differences between autosomes and sex chromosomes.

vPy bp

How is sex determined? Explain.

213


6. Mention the number of chromosomes in a cell of the following
organisms.

i, frog

ii, onion ii, pine

7. Write short notes on:

a) Turner’s syndrome

b) Klinefelter’s syndrome

c) Down’s syndrome

Project Work

Visit every class of your school. Find the number of girls and boys. Calculate
the ratio of boys and girls of each class. Discuss your findings with your

classmates.

GLOSSARY
Autosomes:
Centromere:
Chromatid:
Diploid:
Gamete:

Gene:

Haploid:

chromosomes that determine various characters except sex
a point where two chromatids connect

each filament of a chromosome

a cell with the complete number of chromosomes

a reproductive cell, either sperm or ovum

a tiny structure located in the chromosome which
determines hereditary characters

a cell with the reduced number of chromosomes

Sex chromosomes: a pair of chromosomes that determines sex of an

individual

214


Asexual and Sexual
Reproduction

Unit 18(A)

You must have noticed organisms giving birth to their off-springs. What, do
you think, are there various modes of reproduction among them?

All the living beings reproduce off-springs of their own kind for the
continuity of their generation. This is known as reproduction. There are
several methods of reproduction in plants and animals. Some animals give
direct birth to their babies while other reproduce by laying eggs. Some
produce the new generation from the parts of their body while some others
reproduce with the formation of gametes.

Generally, there are two modes of reproduction.
i. Sexual reproduction ii, Asexual reproduction
Sexual Reproduction

Sexual reproduction is a type which occurs by the fusion of male gamete and
female gamete. Most of the higher animals possess either a male reproductive
part or a female reproductive part in an individual. But in some lower
organisms like hydra, earthworm etc. both male and female gametes are
produced in the same individual. Such animals are called hermaphrodite or
bisexual.

In higher plants, flower of some plants are bisexual whereas some plants have
unisexual flower.

Features of sexual reproduction
1, Sexual reproduction requires the involvement of each male and female.
2. The offsprings are genetically different from their parents.

3. It occurs by the formation of gametes and their fusion.

4. The offsprings produced attain maturity after a long time.

Asexual reproduction

Asexual reproduction is a type which occurs without the involvement of
gametes. It means that asexual reproduction takes place through body parts,
splitting of the body, formation of spores and buds etc. The organisms
produced in this way are genetically identical to each other and also identical
to the parent.

21s


Features of asexual reproduction

1.

2.
3.
4

Only one parent involves in this process.
New organisms produced are genetically identical to their parent.
New organisms get matured within a short time.

Asexual reproduction is assisted by mitosis cell division in higher
organisms and direct cell division in lower and microscopic organisms.

Asexual reproduction in plants

1.

Fission
Fission is a method of asexual reproduction in which a unicellular

organism divides into two or more new organisms. It occurs in diatoms,

chlamydomonas, protozoans, bacteria etc. on:

  

Types of fission

ca memorane
Binary fission ab
b. Multiple fission 3-35 — nia

a. Binary fission: Binary fission is a method of
asexual reproduction in which a unicellular
organism divides into two new organisms. It is
common in bacteria, diatoms, etc, It occurs
during the favourable conditions.

Fission

Fig.: 18(A).4

b. Multiple fission: It is the method in which
nucleus of unicellular organisms
undergo multiple division into more than
two nuclei inside the cyst of mother cell
which later on comes out of the cyst
and start surviving individually. Usually,
chlamydomonas, myxomytes, etc. adopt
this method for reproduction. Fig: 18(A).2

 

Budding

Budding: Budding is a method of asexual reproduction in which an
outgrowth called bud is produced on the parent body. Then, its separates
from the parent body and grows independently into the complete
organism. It is common in yeast, hydra etc,

Activity 18(A) 1

i) Take 100 ml of water and dissolve 10 gm of sugar in it.

216


ii) Separate 20ml. of that sugar solution in a test tube and put some
yeast cells in it.

iii) Close the open end of the test tube and place it in a warm place and
observe. Discuss the result in your classroom,

Fragmentation: Fragmentation is a
method of asexual reproduction in which
the body of an organism splits into many
fragments and each fragment is grown
into a complete organism. It is common
in Riccia, Spirogyra, etc.

   

Fig.: 18(A).3 fragmentation

Sporulation: Sporulation is a method of asexual reproduction which
occurs through spores. Spores are produced inside the sporangia of the
plants like mushroom, fern, mould, ete. When the wall of a sporangium
breaks, spores are released and germinate into the new organisms.
Vegetative propagation

Vegetative propagation is a

    

method of asexual reproduction Spore
which occurs through — é&
vegetative parts like root, stem q
and leaves. The new organism

produced by this method is

genetically identical. Zinger,

colocasia (Pidalu), potato,

onion, rose, sugarcane, garlic

etc. reproduce through stem. TS .
Plants like — Bryoplyllum, Sporangium
Begonia, walking fern, etc. reproduce ripstats

through leaves. Sweet potato, dahlia,
asparagus, etc. reproduce through root.

217


bud

 

new plant new plant
) ¢ 7
Bem XOX
reat
root
Potato Onion Bryophyllum

Fig.: 18(A).5 vegetative propagation

Activity 18(A)2

Take a potato and make small pieces of it. Each piece must have at least one
bud. Put all the pieces in the wet cotton placed on the tray. Observe the
changes occurred in them after some days.

Advantages of vegetative propagation
i. Genetically identical organisms are produced by vegetative propagation.
ii. It is a cheaper, faster and easier method of reproduction.

iii, It is a good method of reproduction of the plants which do not produce
good quality seeds like banana, sugarcane, rose, potato etc.

iv. Itis very useful to preserve the plants which are rare and endangered.
Asexual reproduction in animals

In animals, asexual reproduction mainly occurs through fission, budding, and
regeneration,

  

 

 

Multiple fission in Plasmodium. Binary fision in Amoeba
. aon
@-@-@- |i,
os
Ne devshter call
a
oD + ms % Lee

Fig.: 18(A).6

218


Fission: Fission is a method of asexual reproduction in the unicellular animals
in which their body divides into two or more than two new cells. It is common
in amoeba, paramecium, euglena, etc. Their body divides into two parts which
is termed as binary fission whereas multiple fission occurs in plasmodium.
During unfavourable condition, a cyst or a protective layer is formed in the
plasmodium, The nucleus inside it divides into many nuclei. Cytoplasm
deposits around each nucleus. The cyst wall breaks during favourable
condition and tiny cells are released and grow independently. Hence,
plasmodium follows multiple fission.

Budding: In budding, a new organism develops from an outgrowth called
bud. A bud is formed on the parent body which detaches eventually from the
parent body and grows independently. It is common in hydra.

Regeneration: In the animals like starfish, tapeworm, planaria, hydra etc. the
body divides into the fragments and cach fragment develop into the complete
organism. This method of reproduction is called regeneration.

Sexual Reproduction in plant

Flower is the reproductive part of angiosperms. A complete flower consists of
calyx, corolla, androecium and gynoecium as the floral parts. A flower having
both androccium (male part) and gynoccium (female part) is called a bisexual
flower whereas a flower having only cither gynoecium or androccium is
called a unisexual flower.

Calyx is the outermost whorl of a flower. It is a collection of sepals. Calyx
protects the inner parts of the flower during bud stage and helps in
photosynthesis. Calyx may be polysepalous (with free sepals) or
gamosepalous (with fused sepals).

Corolla is a group of colourful petals to attract Stigma
animals/insects. Its main function is to help in
pollination. Like calyx, a corolla may be
polypetalous or gamopetalous.

    

Androecium is the third whorl of a flower and
consists of stamens which are the male pyc
reproductive parts. A stamen has a bilobed
anther and a stalk like filament. Anther
consists of pollen sacs filled with pollen
grains. A pollen grain contains male gametes.

Sepal

Fig.: 18(A}.10

Gynoecium or pistil is the innermost whorl which is the female part of the
flower. A pistil may consist of a number of carpels. Each carpel consist of

219


three parts: a basal swollen ovary, a stalk like style and a terminal receptive
part called stigma. The ovary contain ovules. Female gamete or egg cell is
formed inside the ovule.

 

 

Do you know?
An anther consists of four pollen sacs. Microspore mother cells are found there which
undergo meiosis process to form pollen grains. Male gametes are formed inside pollen
grains,

 

 

 

Activity 18(A)3

Collect some mustard flowers, study the different parts using hand lens one by
one. Separate different parts of a flower with the help of a pin. Discuss with
friends and draw the diagrams of cach part.

Pollination: The transfer of pollen grains from anther to stigma is called
pollination. Pollination occurs in two different ways.

1. Self pollination
2. Cross pollination

In the bisexual plants like wheat, pea, cotton, etc. self-pollination takes place.
It is the transfer of pollen grains from the anther to the stigma of the same
flower or from one flower to another flower of the same plant. In the bisexual
plants, anther and stigma mature simultaneously.

In the plants like maize, coconut, oak etc. cross pollination takes place. It
occurs both in bisexual and unisexual flowers. It is the transfer of pollen
grains from the anther of a flower of one plant to the stigma of a flower of
another plant but of the same species with the help of agents like wind, water,
animals, etc.

Fertilization

The fusion of male gamete and female gamete to form zygote is called
fertilization. In plants fertilization takes place after pollination. When the
male gametophytes called pollen grains reach to stigma, the pollen grains
germinate into long tube like structures called pollen tubes. A pollen tube
grows towards ovule. The two male gametes formed in a pollen grain pass
through the pollen tube. The pollen tube enters into the ovule through
micropyle. After entering into the ovule, the pollen tube enters into the
embryo sac. In the embryo sac, there are found three antipodal cells, two
synergids, a female gamete or egg cell and a secondary nucleus (a secondary
nucleus is formed by the fusion of two haploid nuclei).

 

220


After the pollen tube enters into the embryo sac, the apex of the tube dissolves
and male gametes are released. One of the male gametes fuses with the egg
cell or female gamete to form zygote. The poliengisin aa ¢
second male gamete fuses with secondary Stigma ——%
nucleus to form endosperm. This fusion of \
haploid male gamete(n) and diploid secondary style ——l
nucleus (2n) to form endosperm a triploid
structure (3n) is called triple fusion. Later on
zygote develops into embryo and endosperm
develops into endospermic tissue which
supplies nutrients to the growing embryo.
Hence, double fertilization takes place in the — Microplyle
angiosperms. After fertilization —ovule \
develops into seed and ovary develops into

fruit. Other parts gradually dry up.

     
    
  

\. Pollen tube

|
H

  

Fig.: 18(A).9

Sexual reproduction in animals

Sexual reproduction takes place in the animals by the fusion of sperm (male
gamete) and ovum (female gamete). Zygote is formed by the fusion of
gametes, The gametes are haploid (n) while the zygote is diploid (2n).
Fertilization in animals is classified into two types.

i) Internal fertilization
ii) External fertilization

Internal fertilization: Internal fertilization is a type of fertilization which
takes place by the fusion of male and female gametes inside the body of
female organism. Mammals, reptiles, birds, insects etc. have this type of
fertilization. The male releases sperms inside the reproductive part of female
during mating and a male gamete and a female gamete fuse inside to form
zygote. Internal fertilization is more safer.

External fertilization: External fertilization is the fusion of male gamete
(sperm) and female gamete (ovum) outside the body of an organism.
Generally it takes place in water. It is common in fishes and frogs. It is highly
affected by the external environmental factors.

 

Do you know?

Gametes are haploid (n) and are formed by the meiosis process. But a zygote
is diploid (2n) formed by the fusion of male and female gametes.

 

 

 

221


Advantages of asexual reproduction

i) Asexual reproduction is a short and simple method of reproduction.
ii) Only one individual parent involves in this process.

iii) The off-springs produced by this method are genetically identical.
Advantages of sexual reproduction

i) The off springs produced by this method are genetically different
from each other or from the parent cell.

ii) The variation caused due to sexual reproduction helps in the organic
evolution.

Summary

1. All the living beings reproduce of their own kind for the continuity of
their race. This is known as reproduction.

2. Sexual reproduction is a type which occurs by the fusion of male
gamete and female gamete.

»

Asexual reproduction is a type of reproduction which occurs without the
involvement of gametes.

4, Advantages of vegetative propagation

i, Genetically identical organisms are produced by vegetative
propagation.

ii, Itis a cheaper, faster and easier method of reproduction.

iii. It is a good method of reproduction of the plants which do not
produce quality seeds like banana, sugarcane, rose, potato, etc.

iv. It is very useful to preserve the plants which are rare and endangered.

5. The fusion of male gamete and female gamete to form zygote is
called fertilization.

6. The transfer of pollen grains from anther to stigma is called pollination.
7. Fertilization in angiosperms is double fertilization.

8. The fusion between secondary nucleus (2n) and a male gamete (n) is
called triple fusion.

222


od

 

A) Choose the best alternatives.

1) The process of reproduction in which a unicellular organism divides
into two identical new organisms is called.

a. binary fission b. fragmentation
¢. sporulation d. budding

2) How does plasmodium reproduce?
a. binary fission b. multiple fission
c. vegetative propagation d. budding

3) What type of fertilization takes place in frog?
a. internal b. external
c. fragmentation d. triple fusion

4) How many chromosomes are found in the human sperm and ovum?

a. 20 b. 21
ce. 22 d. 23
5) What type of reproduction takes place in tapeworm?
a, regeneration b. sporulation
c. fission d. budding

B) Answer the following questions.

1. Define sexual and asexual reproduction. Write two features of
each process.

2. What is pollination? How is self-pollination different from cross
pollination?

3. Write some advantages of asexual reproduction
4. How is diploid number of chromosomes maintained in zygote?
5. Differentiate between:

i. binary and multiple fission

ii. gamete and zygote

iii. internal and external fertilization

223


iv. calyx and corolla
vy. _ androecium and gynoecium

vi. male and female gametes

6. What type of asexual reproduction does occur in the following
cases?
i. amoeba ii. starfish
iii, yeast iv. fern
V. potato vi. rose

7. Sugarcane is reproduced by its stem. What type of
reproduction is this? Write three advantages of this method.

Project work

Visit to a pond during rainy season. Study the external ferti

tion process of

 

frogs. Prepare a report after your observation and present it to your class.

GLOSSARY

Fertilization: fusion of male and female gamete to form zygote

Meiosis: a process of cell division by which four haploid daughter
cells are formed

Mitosis: a process of cell division which occurs in the somatic cells
to form two genetically identical daughter cells

Pollination: transfer of pollen grains from anther to stigma

224


Artificial Vegetative

Unit 18(8) Propagation in Plants

You must have seen farmers growing fruits and flowers artificially with the
use of modern technique. What, you think, are the various ways of artificial
reproduction in plants? What benefits do the farmers gain through such
reproduction of plants?

Artificial vegetative propagation is a rapid multiplication process in plants.
This method helps farmers to produce large number of new plants from a
single parent plant in an economic way. For this purpose, various parts of
plants like stem, root, and leaves can be used. This method can be applied in
case of plants that bear fruits and flowers.

According to the techniques used, it is of different types. Some common
methods are following.

Layering: In this method, the lower branch of a plant is inserted into the soil.

The part inside the soil gives rise to the roots from nodes which is separated

from the parent plant and grows independently. It is common in rose, jasmine,

lemon, strawberry etc.

Types of layering
i, Simple layering: In this method old branches of
the plants are bent and inserted inside soil. After 2-3
months, the inserted part develops roots. By
the end of rainy season, the rooted part is separated
from the parent plant and transferred in the nursery stn /
bed. It is common in lemon, nibuwa etc. Fig.: 18(8)1 Simple layering

      

Compound layering: In this method, the
maximum part of an old branch is inserted into
the soil, leaving the apex in the air. New plant
grows from the different nodes which are then
separated from parent plant and transferred into
the nursery bed. It is common in apple, pear, wall
nut ete.

 

225


iii. Tip layering: In this method, only the tip
of the branch is inserted into the soil. The
tip develops root and shoot. After 3-4
months the plant is separated from the
parent plant. It is common in blackberry.

 

iv. Mound or stool layering: Mound or
stool layering is suitable for heavy
stemmed trees with tight branches. In
the spring, the stems of young tree
are cut about 15cm above the trunk.
As a result, a number of new buds
develop. They are covered with soil
for roots to develop. After one year
the new plants are ready to be
transferred to nursery beds. It is suitable si
for mango, guava, pear, plum etc. Fig.: 18(B)4 Mound or stool layering

 

Air layering: In this method, a piece of
branch is scrapped by removing a ring of
the bark. Rooting hormone is placed at the
cut parts. The cut part is covered with
grafting clay and wrapped with a
polythene sheet. After a month, roots
appear. The rooted part is separated from the
parent plant and is planted into the soil. It is
common in the plants like Mango.

 

Fig.: 18(B)5 Air layering

Grafting: It is a modern technique in which a part of one plant is transplanted
to other plant of closely related variety or species. The part of the plant with
the root system is stock and the part of the plant which is grafted is called
scion. It is common in apple, mango, peach etc.
Types of grafting Fon
i. Whip grafting: Whip grafting is suitable method
when the stock and scion are of similar diameter
and size. A slanted cut of about 3.5cm is made in
both the scion and stock. After the cuts are made, stock
both the parts are kept together tightly so as both
Fig.: 18(B)6 Whip grafting
226


the surfaces match closely are wrapped with plastic or rubber. After 2-3
months, when both parts join properly, the wrapper is removed.

ii. Tongue Grafting: it is also an easy and
reliable method of grafting. In this method,
the lower part of the scion and upper part of
the stock are cut to make 3cm to Sem long
slopes. A fissure of about 1cm depth is made.
The cut parts of scion and stock are fixed
together and it is made air tight by wrapping
with plastic. When both the parts scion and
stock join together, the plastic is removed. Fig.: 18(B)7 Tongue Grafting

Steck

 

Activity 18 (B) 1
i, Select suitable stock and scion for grafting

ii, The lower part of scion and upper part of stock are cut making inverted
V shape.

 

Fix both the parts and the joint is made air tight by wrapping with the
plastic.

iv. Observe the result for 2-3 months.

 

iii, Cleft grafting: This method is appropriate for the fruiting plants when
scion are thinner in diameter than that of
the stock. In this method, the stock is cut @
horizontally and a 5-8 cm deep fissure is ,,,,, le

made on its centre. The lower part of the
scion is cut into V-shape and fixed into
the fissure. Then it is wrapped with tape
or covered with grafting-wax. After 2-3 soc Jj 4

months, both the scion and stock are
fused strongly and the tape is removed. Fig.: 18(B}6 Whip grafting

Tissue culture: This is a modern technique of reproduction in which a cell or
tissue of a plant is grown in an artificial medium to regenerate new plant. In
this method, a cell or a part of tissue is cultured in an artificial culture medium
which consists nitrogen and hormones like auxin, cytokinin in a balanced
condition. The tissue grows into an unorganized mass called callus. The callus
is divided into many pieces and is kept in another culture medium where roots
and shoots grow and plantlets are formed. The plantlets are transferred into
the soil for their independent growth.

227


Advantages of tissue culture

1.

A large number of genetically identical organisms are produced by
this method.

 

2. It helps to preserve the rare and endangered plants by their rapid
multiplication.
Summary

1. Artificial vegetative propagation is a rapid multiplication process in
plants. For this purpose, various parts of plants like stem, root and leaves
can be used.

2. During layering, the lower branch of a plant is inserted into the soil. The
part inside the soil gives rise to the roots which is separated from the
parent plant and grows independently.

3. Grafting is a modern technique in which a branch of one plant is
transplanted to other plant of closely related variety or species. The part
of the plant with the root system is stock and the part of the plant is
grafted is called scion.

4. Tissue culture is a modern technique of reproduction in which a cell or
tissue of a plant is grown in an artificial medium to regenerate new plant
ina large number.

5. Artificial methods of vegetative propagation have great importance in
horticulture, forestry, agriculture as well as in many scientific researches.

is

A. choose the best alternatives.

1. What is the rooted part of grafting called?

a. Stock b. Scion
c. Stem d. Both a and b
2. Layering is used to propagate

a. Maize b. Jasmine

c. Rose d. Pea

228


vk YRS we

Why is tissue culture important?

a. To develop healthy plants

b. To produce many plantlets from the tissue of a single plant
c. Both a. and b.

d. None of the above

What is the method in which many plantlets are prepared simultancously
in an artificial media?

a. Mound layering b. Grafting
c. Tissue Culture d. Compound layering
Answer the following questions.

What is layering? Mention its types.

What is stock? How are stock and scion selected for grafting?

Define tissue culture. Write its advantages.

What is grafting? Mention two methods of grafting and explain in brief.
Write short notes on

a. Simple layering

b. Compound layering

c. Importance of artificial vegetative propagation

In the context of Nepal, which of the methods out of layering, grafting,
cutting and tissue culture seems more appropriate? Justify.

Project work

Visit to a agricultural farm. Observe the methods of artificial vegetative
propagation of the different plants. Prepare a report after your observation and
submit the report to your subject teacher.

GLOSSARY
Auxin: A hormone required for the growth of roots

Cytokinin: A kind of hormone helps the stem to develop
Tissue culture: A modern technique of reproduction through

tissue or cells

229


Unit 19 Heredity

‘You must have noticed similarities and differences between children and their
parents in terms of their physique. For example, the colour of skin, the colour
of eyes, the shape of nose, etc. Parents and their children are similar but not
exactly identical. What, do you think, is the reason behind this?

Heredity is the transfer of characteristics from one generation to the next
generation. This inheritance of characters from one generation to the next
generation takes place in all the living beings. It occurs through the
chromosomes present in the gametes (sperm and ovum) of the parents. The
chromosomes present in the sperm and ovum carry all the parental
characteristics. Due to this all the organisms reproduce offsprings of their own
kind.

Chromosomes are the sites for the genes which are actually the hereditary
carriers. The offsprings resemble their parents on one hand and on the other
hand, they are seemed different from their parents.

It happens due to crossing over during gamete formation and also due to the
environmental factors, Gradual change occurs in the organisms during the
course of adaptation to the changing environment by the organisms.

In this unit, we study about the Mendel’s experiment, laws and variation.

Key Terms to Understand Heredity

Gene: A gene is a tiny segment of DNA which determines the particular
characteristic.

Alleles: An allele is one of the other forms of the same gene. Example: In Tt,
T is an allele of ‘t’ and vice versa.

Homozygous Organism (Pure Organism): An organism having two
identical alleles (genes) that determine a particular characteristic. Example:
Tall pea plant having TT.

Heterozygous Organism: An organism having two different alleles is called
heterozygous organism. For example, Hybrid tall pea plant with genotype Tt.

Phenotype: The external appearance or expression of an organism is called
phenotype.

Genotype: The genetic makeup of an organism of a particular character is
called genotype.

230


First filial generation: The offsprings produced by the cross between two
pure parents are called first filial generation or F, generation.

Second Filial Generation: The offsprings produced from the first generation
are called second filial generation or F generation.

Dominant and recessive characters: When a cross is made between two
pure individuals having or considering a pair of contrasting characters, only
one character appears externally in the first generation and another remains
hidden. The character which is expressed in the first generation is called
dominant character and the character which remains hidden in the first
generation is called recessive character.

Monohybrid and dihybridcross: When a cross is made between two pure
individuals having or considering a pair of contrasting characters, the cross is
called monohybrid cross. When a cross is made between two pure individuals
having or considering two pairs of contrasting characters, the cross is called
dihybrid cross.

 

Symbols given to the genes

English alphabets are used to symbolize the genes. The Alphabet used is the
first letter of the character. The dominant gene is symbolized with the capital
letter and recessive gene is symbolized with small letter. For example,T and t
are used to symbolize tall (Dominant) and dwarf (recessive) characters
respectively.

Mendel’s Experiment

Gregor John Mendel is known as the pioneer in the field of genetics. He did
his research work on common garden pea (Pisum sativum) to prove that the
hereditary characters transfer from parents to their offsprings and to know the
rules that they follow while transferring characters from parents to their
offsprings. Mendel selected pea plant for his research due to the following
reasons.

i. Pea plants have short life span and can be grown easily.

ii, Pea plants are bisexual. So, they are self pollinating plants. But
cross pollination can also be done when necessary.

iii, The hybrids produce fertile offsprings.
iv. Pea plants are available in the number of contrasting characters.
v. They are cultivated easily and are easily available,

vi. They produce a large number of offsprings.

231


Mendel selected seven pairs of the contrasting characters of the pea plant
for his research, The characters are given below:

i. Height of the plant: Tall(TT) and —dwarf(tt)
ii, Position of the flower: Axial(AA) and Terminal(aa)
iii, Colour of the flower: Red(RR) and White (rr)
iv. Colour of the pod : Green(GG) and __yellow(gg)
v. Shape of the pod : Inflated(I1) and —_constricted(ii)
vi. Shape of the seed : Round(RR) and wrinkled(rr)
vii. Colour of the seed : Yellow(YY) and green(yy)

Mendel conducted research on the pea plant using seven pairs of contrasting
characters as mentioned above. During the course of his experiment first he
confirmed the pure breeding plants by allowing them for self pollination.
Then, he conducted his experiment making a cross between two pure
individuals having a pair of contrasting characters.

He made a cross between pure tall pea plant and pure dwarf pea plant. All the
offsprings produced in this generation were tall and named as F; generation or
first filial generation. He conducted his experiment of the similar type using
other pairs of contrasting characters. He found the same result in all the cases.

  

Pure tall Hybrid tall Pure dwarf

9.1 Pure all, Hybrid tall and pure dwarf Pea plants

Fig

 

The character which was expressed externally in the F generation was named
as dominant character and the hidden character in the first generation was
named as the recessive character.

232


When the hybrid pea plants obtained in the first generation were self
pollinated in the second filial generation(F) generation) 75% pea plants were
found tall and 25% were found dwarf, i.e. the phenotypic ratio of tall and
dwarf pea plant was found 3:1, and the genotypic ratio of the pure tall, hybrid
tall and pure dwarf was 1:2:1. When the obtained pea plants of F2 generation
were self pollinated, in F; generation it was found that pure tall pea plant of F>
generation produced tall plants only. Hybrid pea plants produced both tall and
dwarf in the ratio 3:1, ic. the genotypic ratio of pure tall, hybrid tall and pure
dwarf pea plants was 1:2:1. The dwarf plant produced only dwarf pea plants.
Finally, he concluded with the following results.

i. Pure tall pea plant produced pure tall offsprings only.

ii, Hybrid tall pea plants on self pollination produced both tall and
dwarf offsprings in the phenotypic ratio of 3:1 and genotypic ratio of
pure tall, hybrid tall and pure dwarf 1:2:1.

iii, Pure dwarf pea plant produced pure dwarf offsprings only.

Mendel’s experiment on pure tall pea plant (TT) and pure dwarf pea plant (tt)
can be shown diagrammatically as below.

Phenotype Tall pea plant Dwarf pea plant
Genotype

Gametes

F) generation

  

(100% hybrid tall)

233


Allowing self-pollination in F; generation

F, generation selfing

   

Gametes,

F generation

F, generation

Fig 19.2 Monohybrid cross

In F, generation the phenotypic ratio of tall and dwarf pea plants is 3:1.

The genotypic ratio of pure tall, hybrid tall and pure dwarf pea plants is 1:2:1.
Mendel’s Laws

After many experiments on pea plants, Mendel formulated the following laws.
i. Law of dominance

ii, Law of segregation or purity of gametes

iii, Law of independent assortment

Here, we’ll learn about the first two laws.

1. Law of dominance:

Mendel’s law of dominance states that, “when a cross is made between
two pure individuals having a pair of contrasting characters, only one
character appears externally in the first generation called dominant
character and another remains hidden as the recessive character.” For
example, in a cross between pure tall pea plant (TT) and pure dwarf pea
plant (tt), all the pea plants produced in F, generation appear tall as the

234


dominant character (trait) and dwarf remains hidden as the recessive
character (trait).

Law of segregation or law of purity of gametes

Mendel’s law of segregation or the law of purity of gametes states that
the hybrids of F, generation possess heterozygous alleles for a character,
one is of dominant nature and another is of recessive nature. They remain
together for a long time but separate or segregate at the time of gamete
formation. Due to separation or segregation of alleles or characters a
gamete contains only one of the alleles either of dominant nature or of
recessive nature. It means gametes formed are pure. So, this law is also
called the law of purity of gametes.

For example, in a monohybrid cross between pure tall pea plant and pure
dwarf pea plant, hybrids of F; generation contain both alleles (T) and (t).
During gamete formation they separate or segregate so that each gamete
bears either (T) or (t). As a result, gametes formed become pure.

Mendel’s Law of dominance and Law of purity of gametes are equally
applicable in the case of animals as well. Guinea pig can be used for this
purpose. Their life span is shorter so that many generations of them can
be observed within a short duration.

When a cross is made between pure black Guinea pig (BB) and pure
white Guinea pig (bb), all the Guinea pigs produced in the first
generation will be of black colour. It proves that black colour in the
Guinea pig remains as a dominant character and white colour remains as
a recessive character. When the guinea pigs of F; generation are crossed
together, 75% of guinea pigs produced are seen black and 25% of them
are seen white. If their genetic study is made, 25% Guinea pigs of F>
generation are found pure black, 50% of the Guinea pigs are found
hybrid black and 25% are found pure white, i.c. The phenotypic ratio of
black and white Guinea pigs in F) generation is 3:1 and that of genotypic
ratio of the pure black, hybrid black and pure white Guinea pigs is 1:2:1.

 

‘The following chart shows the cross between pure black Guinea pig (BB)
and pure white Guinea pig (bb).

235


Phenotype Black guinea pig White guinea pig

Genotype

Gametes,

    
  

(100% hybrid
black guinea)

F) generation:
vector Co)

Fig-19.3

In 2" generation the phenotypic ratio of black and white Guinea pig is 3:1.
The genotypic ratio of pure black, hybrid black and pure white Guinea pigs is
12:1.

T.H. Morgan conducted similar type of research on Drosophila. When he

crossed a long winged Drosophila with a short winged Drosophila, all the
offsprings produced in F; generation were hybrid long winged. When the


hybrids of the first generation were crossed together, the offsprings produced
in F, generation were 75% long winged and 25% short winged. When the
genetic study was made, it was found that 25% were pure long winged, 50%
were hybrid long winged and 25% were pure short winged in F2 generation.

Phenotype Long winged drosophila _short winged drosophila

Gametes Oo) QQ)

 
 
    
 

F, generation G)

F generation {|
Gametes

(100% hybrid long drosophila)

   

F> generation

Figs 19.4

237


The above figure shows monohybrid cross between pure long winged
Drosophila and pure short winged Drosophila.

Some genetic Characteris

 

ics in human beings

Human beings also have some dominant and recessive characteristics. Some
of them are mentioned below.

 

S.N

Dominant characters

Recessive characters

 

1

Straight thumb

Back turned thumb

 

Isolated ear lobule

Joint ear lobule

 

Curly hair

Straight hair

 

Presence of dimple on cheeks

Absence of dimple on
cheeks

 

Fore bending of tongue

No fore bending

 

Rolling of tongue

No rolling of tongue

 

Dense body hair

Less body hair

 

 

 

Blackish skin

 

Whitish skin

 

 

 

 

(8)

(a) Bending thumb. (b) Non bending thumb, (c) Thumb bending back. (¢) Thum no bending back.
(e} Rolling tongue. (f) Folding tongue. (g) Non rolling tongue.

 

Fig. 19.5 showing dominant and recessive characters in human beings.

Activity 19.1

Observe the dominant and recessive characters found in your classmates.
Compare them with the characters mentioned in the table given above.

238

 


Variation: Although the offsprings resemble their parents in many aspects,
they are not exactly identical. The differences among the individuals may be
in regard to skin colour, height, body structure etc. Hence, the physiological
difference among the individuals of the same species which gives them
individuality is called variation.

Variation is divided into two types.

 

ii,

Hereditary variation or genetic variation
Environmental variation

Hereditary variation: This type of variation is mainly caused due to
structural and functional change in the genes found in the
chromosomes at the time of gamete formation by meiosis cell division. It
is common in all the organisms which reproduce by _ sexual methods.

Environmental variation: Environment plays a great role in bringing
variation among the individuals. The factors of this variation are
light, temperature, air, availability of food etc. Even the offsprings
produced from the same parents become different phenotypically
due to these factors. Hence, the variation that occurs among the
organisms due to environmental factors is called environmental
variation.

On the basis of the degree of difference, variation is classified into two types.

i

 

ii,

Continuous variation
Discontinuous variation

Continuous variation: It is a variation which occurs gradually in the
organisms. For example, difference in height, skin colour, eye colour,
etc.

Discontinuous variation: It is a variation which occurs suddenly in the
organism, caused due to mutation. For examples, six digits in the limbs,
tailless kitten, etc.

Mutation

A sudden and discontinuous variation that occurs in the organisms is called
mutation. The factors for mutation are X-rays, gamma rays and different
chemicals which are called mutagens. For example, a four legged chicken, a
baby produced with six digits, etc.

239


Differences between variation and mutation

 

Variation Mutation

 

The physiological difference that
brings individuality to the organism
is called variation.

It is the sudden change in the
genetic composition of an organism.

 

 

 

 

Tt is caused due to heredity and It is caused due to the factors like
environment. X-rays, UV rays and chemicals.
Summary
1. Heredity is the transfer of characteristics from one generation to the next
generation.
2. The transfer of characters occurs through the chromosomes present in the
gametes (sperm and ovum) of the parents.
3. A gene is a tiny segment of DNA which determines the particular
characteristic.
4. An individual produced by the cross between two different parents with
pure contrasting characters is called hybrid.
5. English alphabets are used to symbolize the genes.
6. Gregor John Mendel is known as the pioneer in the field of genetics.
7. After many experiments on pea plants, Mendel formulated the following
laws.
i. Law of dominance
ii, Law of purity of gametes
iii, Law of independent assortment.
8. The physiological difference among the individuals of a species which
gives them individuality is called variation.
9. A sudden and discontinuous variation that occurs in the organisms is

called mutation.

240

 


eprer em

»

od

 

choose the best alternatives.
The factors which represent the contrasting pairs are called:
a, Dominant and recessive b. Alleles

c. Homozygous pai

 

d. Sperm and ovum

The phenotypic ratio of the off spring produced in F) generation of
monohybrid cross is

a.3:1 b.1:2:1

©. 9:3:3:1 d.1:3

Which one of the following did not constitute the seven contrasting pairs
studied by Mendel in the pea plant?

a. Shape of the leaves b. Height of the plants

c. Colour of the flower d. Position of the flower

Why did Mendel select pea plant for the experiment?

a, Pea plants are found in varieties of contrasting characters
b. Self pollination and cross pollination can be done

c. Short life span

d. All of the above

Which type of variation is mutation?
a. Continuous b. Discontinuous
c. Hereditary d. Environmental

Answer the following questions.

Define heredity and variation.

Why is Mendel known as father of genetics?

Why did Mendel select the pea plant for his experiment?

Define the following terms

i, Hybrids ii, Monohybrid cross

iii, Phenotype and genotype _iv. Dominant and recessive characters

v. Gene

241


5. State Mendel’s laws and explain the law of purity of gametes.

6. Draw a chart to show the offsprings produced in F; and F) generation
when a cross is made between pea plants of pure red flower and pure
white flower.

7. What is variation? Mention its types.
8. Write two differences between variation and mutation,

9. Study the table and answer the questions given below.

 

T t

 

T TT Tt

 

t Tt tt

 

 

 

 

 

i. Which filial generation is shown in the table?
ii. What is the ratio of the dominant and recessive characters?

iii, | Which one of the given off-springs represents the pure tall
plant?

Project Work

Study the dominant and recessive characters of your family members on the
basis of height, skin color and nature of hair. Prepare a chart of dominant and
recessive characters. Present your chart in the classroom.

GLOSSARY
Drosophilla: a kind of fruit fly

Hybrid: an individual produced by crossing two pure parents
having contrasting characters

Meiosis: a method of cell division which produces four haploid
daughter cells from a single diploid cell

242


Environmental Pollution and
Management

Unit 20

You have seen many people suffering from various diseases such as typhoid,
cholera, dysentery, eye infection, infection of respiratory parts, skin diseases,
and even some fatal diseases like cancer. These diseases are spreading at an
alarming rate these days. Do you know the reason behind the terrific increase
of such diseases?

Environment is the surrounding around us. It includes all the biotic and
abiotic components. The biotic components include plants and animals where
as abiotic components include all the non-living factors such as soil, air,
water, light etc. Balanced environment helps every creatures of the earth to
live their life in a happy and healthy manner. But the unbalanced and polluted
environment disturbs everyone’s life and causes hazards. Over population
growth, industrialization, urbanization etc. are the major causes behind
environmental pollution, which is the undesired spread of toxic chemicals into
the physical and biological components of the environment. Pollution usually
affects multiple systems. It causes hardships to plants, animals and other
organisms. Contamination of air, water and soil causes the spreading of
various diseases. Industries and factories are releasing many harmful gases
into the environment. If it continues, the amount of carbon monoxide and
carbon dioxide get increased in the air. As a result, the temperature of the
earth increases.

 

     

In this chapter, we are going to discuss on the causes, effects and mitigating
measures of air pollution, water pollution and soil pollution.

Air pollution

Air pollution is the entrance of harmful substances into the atmosphere. It
may cause diseases, allergies and even the death of humans. It also harms
other animals, plants and destroys the natural environment. The harmful
substances that cause pollution are called pollutants. Air pollutants are usually
carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen
expelled from high temperature combustion. Similarly, methane, toxic metals
like lead and mercury, chlorofluorocarbons released from air conditions,
refrigerators, odours from garbage, sewage and nuclear explosions are also
the main air pollutants.

243


Sources of air pollution

1. Natural sources: These are the sources usually occur in the nature. For
example, volcanic explosion, forest fire, soil erosion, ete.

 

2. Artificial sources: These are the artificial or manmade sources
like carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, ammonia, oxides of nitrogen,
sulphur dioxide, chlorine etc. Most of them are released from the
factories and industries while burning the things. Mobile sources like
motor vehicles, aircrafts, fumes from paint, spray, waste deposition
which generate methane cause air pollution.

Effects of air pollution

Air pollution is a significant risk factor for a number of pollution related
diseases and health, Some major effects of air pollution are given below.

 

The minute solid particles like carbon enter into our body and become
the major cause of lung diseases. These particles settle on the plants and
disturb photosynthesis.

ii, Unburned fuels cause the production of carbon monoxide. It is extremely
poisonous. It mixes with the blood and prevents it from carrying oxygen.
It may cause the death of a person.

iii. Excess carbon dioxide in the air causes green house effect. Other gases
that cause the effect are nitrous oxide, methane, sulphur dioxide,
chlorofluorocarbons, etc. Collection of these gases in the atmosphere
blocks the solar radiations to return back and causes global warming.
This can cause large scale melting of ice in the polar reasons leading to
flooding of coastal areas by sea water.

iv. Distant objects cannot be seen because of the accumulation of smoke and
gases in the air. Visibility degradation is caused by the absorption and
scattering of light by particles and gases in the air. Hence, air pollution
causes reduction in visibility.

y. Chlorofluorocarbons, methyl chloroform, carbon tetrachloride like gases
damage the ozone layer. It causes an increase in the amount of ultraviolet
rays from the sun reaching the earth. The uv rays causes eyes and skin
diseases to the human beings.

vi. Climate change is caused due to air pollution. It results extreme cold
during winter and extreme hot during summer.

vii, Polluted air causes various airborne diseases to the human beings. It
adversely affects the respiratory tract. It causes eyes infection, bronchitis,

244


heart diseases, and cancer. It also causes disturbed sleep, weakness,
irritation etc. The lead present in the air is absorbed by our body which
causes mental disorder.

viii. Sulphur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen cause damage of leaves of the
plants. Dust particles deposited on the leaf of plants reduce
photosynthesis. The reduction of photosynthesis decreases productivity
of plants.

Measures to control air pollution

i. Industries, factories and chimneys are established far from the settlement
areas. The harmful gases given off should pass through water before they
are released out. This helps the poisonous gases like SO, NO> to be
dissolved in the water.

ii, Use of specially designed smokeless stoves for buming coal, kerosene
etc. should be practiced.

iii, Afforestation reduces the air pollution.

iv. Use of alternative energy sources like solar energy, hydroelectricity etc.
y. Controlling rapid population growth.

vi. Manage legal provision and creating awareness.

vii. Banning old vehicles.

Water pollution

Water is the most abundant substance on the earth’s surface. It exists in the
three states solid, liquid and gas. Pure water is tasteless and odorless. Water
is very essential for all the organisms to live. River, springs, lakes, ponds,
wells, etc. are the sources of water. But water of all these sources is getting
polluted day by day. Wastes discharged from industries, hospitals and homes
cause the water resources polluted. Water pollution is the undesired change in
the original quality of water that adversely affects the health of humans and
other organisms.

Sources of water pollution

Human activities are mainly responsible for water pollution. Some major
sources are given below:

1. The disposal of sewage water to the rivers, streams, and other sources
cause water pollution. It degrades the quality of water.

245


2. The wastes produced in the industries and factories, various chemicals
and papers are disposed in the water sources.

3. Excessive use of pesticides and insecticides causes water pollution. They
are used in the crop field. During raining, rain water carries these
chemicals into the water resources which degrade the quality of water.

4, Natural disasters like flood, soil erosion, heavy rainfall, etc. causes water
pollution.

5. Sudden bursting of drainage pipe and leakage cause water pollution.

6. Washing clothes, bathing cattles, cleaning utensils near water sources can
cause water pollution.

7. Nuclear test in the water sources cause water pollution.
Measures to control water pollution

1. Wastes produced at homes, industries and factories should be disposed
properly. The wastes produced at the hospitals, industries, etc. should be
treated well before they are discharged.

2. Adopting effective control of flood, landslide by constructing check
dams,

Using biodegradable fertilizers and pesticides.
4. Reducing chemical fertilizer run off into the sources of water.
Banning nuclear test in the water sources.
6. Proper management of drainage system.
7. Tree plantation.
8. Reducing the use of excessive chemical fertilizers and pesticides.
Soil pollution

Soil pollution is the degradation of quality of the soil due to the presence of
wastes. With the rise of building and roads, soil pollution has highly
increased. It is mainly due to manmade wastes. The waste produced from the
nature itself such as dead plant, rotten parts etc. only add to the fertility of
soil. However, manmade wastes are full of chemicals that are not naturally
found and lead to soil pollution.

246


Main causes of soil pollution

1.

Industrial wastes are the major soil pollutants. The wastes include
chemicals, metals and non-metals, contaminated things, etc. Such wastes
reduce the fertility of soil as well as harm the human health.

There is the excessive use of chemicals to destroy the insects and pests
that destroy our crops. They reduce the fertility of soil. Some chemicals
damage the composition of the soil and make it easier to erode by water
and air.

A growing cause of soil pollution is the disposal of waste water. The
contaminated water from the industries and factories degrade quality of
soil. The urine and feces disposed into the field causes soil pollution.

Acid rain is caused due to the mixing up of the chemicals with the rain
and fall down on the ground. The acid containing rain water dissolves
many nutrients in the soil and changes the structure of the soil.

People use various things at home in their life. The things become wastes
after they are used for a long time. Dust, papers, utensils, metals, plastics,
rotten fruits and vegetables, etc. are the waste products. When these
things are thrown in the land, they cause the degradation of the soil.

Fertilizers are used to increase the crop production. Excessive deposition
and use of these chemicals cause the reduction of the fertility of soil.

Measures to control soil pollution

1.

eID

Use of such pesticides which kills the harmful pests and insects but does
not contaminate the soil with toxic chemicals.

Pesticides and insecticides should be used in a limited amount in the
agricultural field only as recommended by the experts.

There should be the gap between the harvesting of crops and spray of
pesticides. It reduces the contamination of crops.

Education to the farmers for regarding the use of pesticides and
fertilizers.

Regular observation of soil nutrients.
Waste water from industries should not be used for irrigation.
Adopting soil conservation practices.

Adopting solid waste management programmes.

247


Conservation and management of forest

Forest is a region with a large number of trees, herbs, shrubs, etc. It is the
habitat of different wild lives. The parts of the plant that undergo decaying
process mix with the soil and increase the fertility of soil. Forest preserves
watersheds. It helps to balance the rainfall pattern. Many medicinal herbs are
found in the forest.

Conservation of forest includes the following points.

1.

awPryvnd

Afforestation in the hilly and sloppy regions.
Control forest fire.

Formulation and effective practice of rules and regulations.
Overgrazing should be controlled.

Launching community forest programme.

Wise use of forest products.

Conservation and management of sources of water

Water is an important natural resource.
Life is not possible without water.
Water is used for drinking, washing
clothes, bathing, irrigation, generating
electricity, running industries etc. Some
of the methods of water conservation
are as follows.

iii,

iv.

 

Do you know?

About 71% of the earth’s crust is
covered by water and 29% is only by
the land,

15.5% of the total land of Nepal is
covered by snowcapped Himalayas,
and 2.7% of the land is occupied by
Using less water and avoiding its | water sources. The water of these
wastage. sources is drinkable.

 

 

 

Banning the use of poisonous
chemicals and electric devices for fishing.

Conducting awareness programmes for the conservation of watersheds
and glaciers.

Recycling of water in the factories and industries before the disposal of
waste water.

Using bio degradable fertilizers and pesticides.
Conducting afforestation programme.

Collection and distribution of water should be made scientific and
systematic.

248


Summary

1. Environmental pollution is the undesired spread of toxic chemicals into
the physical and biological components of the environment.

 

2. Excessive deposition and use of chemicals cause the reduction of the
fertility of soil

3. Air pollution is the entrance of harmful substances into the
atmosphere. It may cause diseases, allergies and even the death of
humans.

4. Human activities are mainly responsible for water pollution. Wastes
discharged from industries, hospitals, homes, etc. make the water
resources polluted.

5. Conservation of forest includes afforestation in the hilly and sloppy
regions, Controlling forest fire, minimum use of forest products ete.

Activity 20.1
Draw the chart showing:
i) Polluted environment

ii) Clean, green and healthy environment

D2

 

A. Choose the best alternatives.

1. What is the mixing of unwanted materials into the air called?

 

a. Air pollution b. Water pollution
c. Soil pollution d. Sound pollution
2. Which one of the following reduces the visibility?
a. Water pollution b. Air pollution
c. Soil pollution d. Sound pollution

3. Which chemicals cause depletion of ozone layer?
a. Methyl chloroform b. Carbon tetra chloride

c, Chlorofluorocarbons d. Carbon dioxide

249


4. Which chemicals cause acid rain?
a. SOz b. NO?
c. Both a and b d. None of the above

B. Answer the following questions

1.
2.

What is environmental pollution?

What are the adverse effects and minimizing measures of air
pollution?

What makes the soil become polluted? How can we reduce soil
pollution?

What are the various effects of water pollution?
What are the different methods of forest conservation?

Write the importance of water for the living beings. How can we
conserve water resources?

Environmental pollution disturbs the ecosystem. Explain.

Project work

Find the major causes of water pollution of the streams and rivers of your
community and prepare a report including its mitigating measures.

GLOSSARY

Chlorofluorocarbons: — chemical that depletes ozone layer

Environment: our surrounding that includes all the living
and non-living things.

Pollution: negative change in the quality of air, water
and soil,

Bronchitis: inflammation or swelling of bronchial tubes

Radiation: the emission of energy in the form of wave

from a material medium

250


unea History of the Earth

The earth is only the planet in the solar system that is suitable for survival of
living organisms including human civilization. The earth is about 4.55 billion
years old, There are several hypothesis about the origin of the earth. Some of
them are as follows:

1.

George Wofan hypothesis (Planetesimal hypothesis)

In 1745, George Wofan put forward a theory of origin of earth,
According to this hypothesis a comet moving around the universe
crashed with the sun, the splashed matter from the sun resulted the
formation of our earth along with other planets and satellites.

Nebular or Kant hypothesis

In 1755, a German philosopher Kant proposed another theory of origin of
earth. According to this hypothesis, the whole of our solar system
including all the heavenly bodies were in an extremely large mass of gas
and dust known as nebula which was nearly circular and was spinning
slowly from west to east. Due to mutual gravitation, particles of nebula
started to be collected at different places. Large mass collected at the
centre of the nebula ultimately became Sun and other small masses
collected at different places became planets, asteroids, satellites, etc. The
spinning motion of the nebula converted into revolutionary motion of
these heavenly bodies around the sun. But in 1796, Laplace modified this
hypothesis. According to him, the Nebula started to gradual cooling and
contraction, resulted into continuous decrease in the size and volume of
Nebula and became a large and loose ball of dust and gases. During this
process, several outer ring formed and detached from the centre one after
another and started to revolve around the centre. The masses in the ring
began to change into planets and satellites while the central core became
the sun.

Tidal or Jean and Jaffery hypothesis

In 1919, Jean and Jaffery proposed another hypothesis. According to this
hypothesis, the sun was a very big and extensive mass of gas which was
moving in space. A big comet came closer to the sun and the
gravitational force of the comet attracted the sun, then the molten mass of

the sun was elongated toward the comet forming tides. As the star moved
away from the sun, some parts of the tide broke down into number of

251


pieces, which became planet and satellite. Finally they began to revolve
around the sun.

Some facts about our earth:

Estimated age:

4.55 billion years

Mass: 6 x 1071 metric tons
Total surface area: 509, 700, 000 km?
Land area: 148, 400,000 km?
Water area: 361, 300, 000 km?
Highest land: 8848 m (Mt. Everest)
Lowest point: 399m (Dead sea)
Average density: 55 gm/em’

Number of satellite: 1 (Moon)

Geological time scale

Geologists have prepared a geological timetable of the earth. The geological
history has been divided into eons, eras, periods and epochs. We shall study
the history of earth only on the basis of era.

The whole geological time scale is divided into four eras. They are,

lL.

= PF wd

Pre Cambrian era
Paleozoic era
Mesozoic era
Cenozoic era

Pre Cambrian era

Pre Cambrian era began about 4.5 billion years ago and ended 570
million years ago. It is actually the combination of Archeozoic (or
Archean), Proterozoic and Eozoic era. The early part of this era is the
beginning of the carth. Some major events of this era are as follows,

a. Metamorphic rocks were formed from igneous rocks.
b. Formation of atmosphere, hydrosphere and lithosphere took place.

c.  Unicellular and multicellular organisms were evolved in shallow
sea that had nearly surrounded the whole earth.

252


 

d. Very primitive bacteria were evolved.
Paleozoic era

Paleozoic era began from 570 millions years ago to 250 millions years
ago. Different terrestrial plants developed in this era so this era can be
termed as the era of big ferns. Major events of this era were as follows:

Sedimentary rocks were formed.

a.
b. Climate change and change in atmosphere took place.

2

Aquatic and terrestrial vertebrates and invertebrates were evolved.

d. Different bryophytes and pteriodophytes were evolved. Fern plant
upto 25ft and club mos upto 100ft were evolved in this era.

Mesozoic era

Mesozoic era began 250 million years ago and ended some 65 million
years ago. This era was dominated by giant reptiles like dinosaurs. The
main events of this era are given below.

a. Hills and mountains were formed.
b. Climate became suitable for aquatic, terrestrial and aerial animals.

c. The giant reptiles like dinosaurs evolved, flourished and were
extinct.

d. Coniferous plants were developed.
e. Mammals began to evolve at the end of this era.
Cenozoic era

Cenozoic era began 65 million years ago and still going on. This era is
also known as era of human beings. Human dominance began in this era.
The main events of this era are given below.

a. Expansion and breaking down of rocks took place.

b. The temperature of the earth decreased and the climate changed
drastically.

c. Mountains were covered with snow due to decrease in temperature.

d. The process of extinction of ancient animals and plants and
evolution of new animals and plants continued in this era.

253


Evolution of life

Our carth is formed about 4.55 billion years ago but its climatic condition was
not suitable for any living things because it was too hot. Slowly as the earth
cooled down, water vapour in the atmosphere condensed and rain fall took
place. Then oceans formed, almost 4.4 billion years ago. Because of the
unfavorable surface condition, the most likely place for life to develop might
have been at deep ocean where the very basic need for life would have been
available. So, it was only 3.8 billions years ago, unicellular bacteria developed
and 3.2 billion years ago, algae developed. In this way evolution of life began.
But in the course, various kinds of organisms were evolved, dominated the
earth and became extinct.

Scientists knew all about evolution, domination and extinction of organisms
with the help of the impressions of hard part of their bodies on the rocks that
are known as fossils. After the in-depth study and analysis of these fossils
scientists discovered various events that took place in different eras and
finally compiled the process of evolution of life on earth.

In Archean era (Pre-chambrian = Archean era + Proterozoic ear), no life had
evolved since no sedimentary rocks were formed. In Proterozoic era,
unicellular organisms were evolved and some multicellular organisms were
developed later. In Paleozoic era, lots of changes in weather took place and
gradually the climatic condition of the earth became favorable for living
organisms so different types of aquatic as well as terrestrial animals such as
fishes, amphibians and some early reptiles evolved. In Mesozoic era, the
change in climate continued. Giant reptiles like dinosaurs and toothed bird,
evolved, developed and also became extinct. This era is also known as age of
reptiles since big, giant reptiles dominated this era. In Cenozoic era, early
humans evolved. Many mammals like cat, rat, dog, bat, elephant, etc. evolved
and developed.

Fossils

The impression of part or whole body of animals and plants on sedimentary
rocks that are buried in the earth crust over a long period of time is called
fossils. The branch of science that deals with the study of fossils is known as
paleontology.

Process of fossils formation

Fossils are formed only on the sedimentary rocks because formation of fossils
and sedimentary rocks take place simultaneously in the same event.

254


Due to natural disasters such as volcanoes, floods and earthquakes, dead
plants and animals get buried under the surface of the earth. Then, the delicate
and soft parts of plants and animals decay while the hard parts remain in the
soil. The process of pressing down of these parts by the soil above them
continued in the ground for a very long time and finally the external
morphology of these hard parts are formed on the soil which by then have
changed into sedimentary rock. In this way, fossils are formed.

Identification of fossils

Fossils identification is a challenging task because even a small detail should
be studied and analysed very carefully, since that small detail separates one
species from another. Fossils are identified by studying the impressions left
on the rocks. They are also identified by studying the structure and
morphology of parts or whole body of living organisms casted on the rocks.
They are also identified by tallying the fossils with the photos of fossils that
were already identified.

Importance of fossils

1. The study of fossils helps to propose and construct the process of
evolution of living organism.

2. The study of fossils also helps to give information about the coal and
petroleum mines.

3. The study of fossils helps to discover geological history by determining
the age of rocks,

Fossil fuels

The fuels formed when the plants and animals get buried under the ground for
a long time, in presence of heat and pressure and in the absence of oxygen are
called fossil fuels. Coal, petroleum and natural gas are the most important
fossil fuels.

a. Coal

Coal is a fossil fuel formed by very compressed plants buried under the
ground for a very long time. They are black in colour and are very good
source of heat. Pure coal such as anthracite, produces heat without
smoke.

Process of formation of coal

Coal is the remains of trees, ferns and other plants that lived millions of
years ago. They were buried under the soil by natural disasters such as
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. As more and more soil deposited

255


over them, they were compressed. The temperature also rose as they sank
deeper and deeper. As the process continued, they were protected from
biodegradation and oxidation. This trapped carbon slowly converted into
coal under high pressure and temperature in the absence of oxygen.

Importance of coal
1. Coal is used as a solid fuel to produce electricity and heat.

2. It is used as fuel in railway transportation, industries, brick factories,
etc.

3. It is also used for the manufacture of organic compound like
benzene, phenol, etc.

Mineral Oil (Petroleum)

Mineral oil or Petroleum is a dark coloured viscous liquid having very
bad odour. They are found naturally in petroleum mines. About 90-95%
of petroleum contains hydrocarbon and rest is oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur,
etc. Mineral oils are actually the remains of phytoplanktons and
zooplanktons buried under the earth crust millions of years ago.

Formation of mineral oils

Mineral oils are formed by the remains of phytoplankton and
zooplankton that are buried under the ocean bed by natural disasters such
as earthquakes and volcanic eruption. The climatic and geo-
morphological conditions of ancient earth was not as stable as it is today.
Drastic change in climate, huge volcanic eruption and massive
earthquakes took place time and again during which micro-organisms of
ocean got buried under the earth crust where they were compressed under
high temperature and pressure in the absence of oxygen. They finally
formed mineral oil or petroleum after the million of years.

Mineral oil directly recovered from mines is crude. They are subjected to
fractional distillation to separate into different components such as
petroleum gas, petrol, kerosene, lubricating oil, diesel, wax, bituminous,
asphalt and tar.

Importance of mineral oil

Different components obtained by the fractional distillation of crude
petroleum oil have different uses. Some of them are given in the table
below.

256


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Components of crude oil Uses
1. | Petroleum gas ‘As domestic fuel as LPG (liquefied
petroleum gas)
2. | Petrol (gasoline) Fuel for cars, making chemicals
3._ | Naphtha Making chemicals
4, | Kerosene, paraffine oil As fuel for jet, aircrafts, stoves
5._| Diesel As fuel for automobiles
6. | Lubricating oil As lubricants, waxes, polishes, etc.
7. | Heavy fuel oil Fuel for ships, factories, ete
8,_| Residue (tar) Bitumen for roads and roofs

Summary

1. The earth is about 4.55 billion years old.

2. The geological history has been divided into eons, eras, periods and
epochs.

3. Cenozoic era began 65 million years ago and still going on. This era is
also known as era of human beings.

4. Mesozoic era began 240 million years ago and ended some 65 million
years ago. Hills and mountains were formed in this era.

5. Paleozoic era began from 570 millions years ago to 240 millions years
ago.

6. Pre Cambrian era began about 4.55 billion years ago and ended 570
million years ago.

7. The impression of part or whole body of animals and plants on
sedimentary rocks that are buried in the earth crust over a long period of
time is called fossil.

8. The fuels formed when the plants and animals get buried under the
ground for a long time, in the presence of heat and pressure but in the
absence of oxygen are called fossil fuels.

9. Coal is the remains of trees, ferns and other plants that lived millions of

years ago.

10. Mineral oil or Petroleum is a dark coloured viscous liquid having very

bad odour. They are found in petroleum mines.

257


‘A. Choose the best alternatives.
1. Dinosaurs dominated the earth in the era,
a. Cenozoic era b. Proterozoic era
c. Paleozoic era d. Mesozoic era
2. Mammals were evolved in :
a. Mesozoic era b. Cenozoic era
c. Paleozoic era d, Proterozoic era
3. Fossils are formed in :
a. Igneous rock b. Metamorphic rock
c. Sedimentary rock d. Ancient soil

4. Which hypothesis does explain the origin of earth from the accumulation
of dust particles and gases ?

a. George Wofans’ hypothesis _b. Jean and Jefferys’ hypothesis
c. Kant Laplace hypothesis d. None of the above

5. What is the estimated age of our earth?
a. 4.55 billion years b. 4.44 billion years
c. 4.33 billion years d. 4.22 billion years

B. Answer the following questions:

1. Mention the hypothesis given by George Wofan regarding the
origin of the earth and solar system.

2. Show your acquaintance on the hypothesis proposed by “Jean
and Jeffery” about the origin of the earth and solar system.

3. Write in brief about the hypothesis that "explains the origin of
earth is from the large mass of gas and dust", Also name this
hypothesis.

 

4. What do you mean by geological time scale? In how many
parts is the geological history of the earth divided?

5. What is the estimated age of the earth? In which era did human
beings evolve and what was the time period of that era?

258


What is the time period of Mesozoic era? What types of plants and
animals are supposed to be developed in this era?

  

7. What is the evidence of presence of dinosaurs on the earth? In which
era did the origin and extinction of dinosaurs take place?
8. Differentiate between Mesozoic era and Cenozoic era on the basis of
major events that took place during these eras.
9. Mention the time period of Precambian era and Paleozoic era. Give
a major event occurred in each of these eras.
10. How do scientists know about ancient living beings?
11. What are fossils? What are their importances? Write in points.
12. How are fossils formed? Explain.
13. Fossils are formed only in sedimentary rocks, why?
14. What is coal? How is it formed?
15. What is meant by mineral oil? How is it formed?
16. Write any two uses of mineral oil.
Glossary
nebula: a cloud in outer space consisting of gas or dust
con: the longest time period used in geology which includes
more than one eras
era: a unit of time smaller then con and greater than period
which includes a complete set of life for sustainable
ecosystem
period: a unit of time smaller than era and greater than epoch
epoch: sub category of period
morphology: a scientific study of form and structure of substance or
organisms
club-moss: a kind of pteridophytes

Phytoplanktons: very primitive aquatic plants

Zooplanktons: very primitive aquatic organisms

259


Climate Change and
Atmosphere

Unit 22

You might have noticed our snow-capped mountains becoming naked day by
day. The temperature of the carth is also increasing at an alarming rate
Similarly, the harmful ultra-violet rays are entering the earth surface through
the atmosphere. What do you think about the sole cause of all these changes
on earth? Suggest some ways to protect our planet earth from these hazards
for a safe life of all the creatures on earth.

Our earth consists of hydrosphere, lithosphere, atmosphere and biosphere.
Due to the presence of all the life supporting factors including suitable
temperature of the Earth, life has become possible in the earth. About 71 % of
the earth crust is covered with water. Atmosphere consists of different gases
such as nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide, water vapour, etc. Existence of
atmosphere is due to the earth’s gravitational force. Adequate availability of
all these things has made the living beings to survive in the earth. Earth has
become the common home of all the living organisms. Due to growing
demand of the human beings, natural environment is being degraded day by
day.

Over population growth, industrialization, urbanization, etc. are the major
causes of environmental degradation. Increased number of vehicles,
establishment of industries, factories and chimneys, etc. are emitting harmful
chemicals and gases in the large amount. Over crowed human settlement,
improper disposal of wastes, use of excessive pesticides and insecticides and
chemical fertilizers cause adverse effect on the earth’s climate. As a result,
earth’s climate is rapidly changing.

Climate change refers to the change of global or regional climate over a long
period of time. It may be due to human activities or due to the natural causes.
Duc to this many negative consequences like global warming, disturbance on
the growth of organisms, less crop production, melting of snow of the
Himalayas, etc have been occurred. These consequences of the climate
change are really hazardous to the human beings and other organisms. The
major effect of climate change is increasing rate of diseases and mortality due
to droughts, floods, spreading of diseases like hepatitis, cholera, malaria ete. It
causes change in temperature, less production of crops, fruits and vegetables.
Global warming is another great result of climate change. Many rivers and
stream will dry up soon due to rapid melting of snow of the Himalayas. There

260


will be the scarcity of drinking water, water for irrigation and hydropower
production. There will be the difficulty for many organisms to adapt in the
changing environment.

Hence to reduce the impacts of climate change there should be the efforts
from every sector in an integrated way. Many efforts have been implemented
in the national and international level to reduce the impacts of climate change.
In this chapter, we will discuss the national and international efforts to
minimize the impacts of climate change, layers of atmosphere, ozone layer
depletion and industrial gases.

National and international efforts to minimize the effects of climate
change

Climate change is the great problem of today's world. It has been alarming in
context of global warming. The adverse effects of global warming have
mostly been noticed in developing countries like Nepal. It has caused heavy
rainfall, floods, landslides, draught and soil erosion. It has been seen that
altogether 14 glacier lakes outburst had happened in between 1935 and 1991
in Nepal. Climate change has caused many negative consequences on all the
living beings. So it’s the present need of every country to make necessary
efforts to minimize the impacts of climate change, United Nations
organization has started implementing various programs to reduce the effects
of climate change. Some efforts made in National and international level to
minimize the adverse effects of climate change are given below:

National efforts

a. National Communication Report

b. Climate Change Policy, 2067

¢. Climate Change Adaption Strategic Program
d. National Adaptation Program

e. Local Adaptation Program

f. Others programs

a. National Communication Report

  

‘Nepal has submitted the initial national communication report to the COP
(Conference of the Parties) of UNO protocol. In this report, Nepal has
mentioned the impacts of climate change, adaptational ways to the
change and various polices and laws to be implemented to combat
climate change. It has also focused on the necessity to research the
impact of climate change in various sectors like transportation, health,

261


c

communication, education, industries, agriculture, management of
wastes, etc.

Climate Change Policy, 2067

Global warming is the result of climate change. It adversely affects
human health, agriculture, forest and various human related aspects. In
this regard, the climate change policy has been formulated to create
awareness among the people and develop adaption.

Climate Change Adaptation Strategic Programme

Nepal was invited by climate investment fund, in the year 2009 to
participate in the global model programme related to adaptation to the
climate change. The world climate model program provides financial
support to the poor countries. The climate change adaptation program of
Nepal has been divided into five sectors : i) climate change adaptation of
watersheds of hilly regions ii) adaptation to risks induced by climate
change iii) develop capable community for climate change adaptation by
the initiation of local sectors iv) promotion of endangered species for
climate change adaptation v) main stream flow of the risk management of
climate change in development projects.

National Adaptation Program

‘National adaptation program was prepared in the year 2010 by the
Government of Nepal. It mainly evaluates the risk of climate change. It
has launched altogether 250 programmes integrating into 9 different
sectors.

Local Adaptation Program

Local adaptation program is specially designed for implementing in the
local level. It prepares and co-ordinates local and National level
programs. It conducts programs to minimize the impacts of climate
change at the local level to provide necessary services to the endangered
communities and region and family. It includes four theories progressive,
inclusive, capability and flexibility while selecting the process of climate
adaptation.

Other programs

Other programs includes programs related to improved chimneys of brick
factories, improved stove, use of biogas, pre-information system about
natural disasters etc.

262


International efforts

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC)

UN Climate Change Conference

Agenda 21

Intergovernmental Forum

Kyoto Protocol

Methods to reduce greenhouse gases on the basis of Kyoto protocol
Reduction of emission due to deforestation

The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC)

UNFCCC was held in the year 1992 in Rio de Jenerio. There were 154
countries participated in the programme. This conference addressed
various aspects like increasing environmental pollution, sustainable
development programme etc. Climate change cannot be stopped
completely. So our life style should adapt to the changing environment.

UN Climate Change Conference

The UN conference on climate change has been conducted 19 times till
2013 AD to inform the works and programmes conducted in a country to
other member countries related to climate change. Nepal also has
prepared and implemented climate change policy-2011 on the basis of
UNFCCC 1992.

Agenda 21

This action plan was formulated on the basis of a slogan “think globally
and act locally” to conserve environment and ensure sustainable
development.

Intergovernmental Forum

Intergovernmental forum was established in the year 1988 A.D. It
prepares report to support the UNFCCC. It consists of the scientific,
technical and socio-economical information to understand the risk of
human caused due to climate change, adverse effects of climate change
and the mitigating measures.

263


5. Kyoto Protocol

It was adopted in December 1997 A.D. Its main objective is to reduce
climate change and production of greenhouse gases to control global
warming. The protocol makes 36 developed countries of the world to
reduce the emission of GHG by 5.25% by 2012 AD from their industries
The provision is now extended for 2020AD by the convention held in
2012 AD at Doha

6. Measures to reduce Greenhouse gases on the basis of Kyoto protocol

The Kyoto protocol encourages developed and developing countries to
work under the three market level mechanisms to meet their GHG
emission target. They are international emission trading, joint
implementation and clean development mechanisms.

7. Reduction of emission due to deforestation

Forests are the important natural resources for the absorption of carbon.
So, developed countries which produce large amount of greenhouse
gases should reduce the activities that destroy forest. Instead, the
developed countries should help underdeveloped countries to conserve
forest providing necessary support.

Atmosphere

The earth is surrounded by the atmosphere. Atmosphere is the layer of
different gases like nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide etc. It is divided into five
different layers. They are troposphere, stratosphere, _mesosphere,
thermosphere and exosphere. The main gases are nitrogen 78%, oxygen 21%,
Argon 0.9%, carbon dioxide 0.03% and rest other gases like water vapour,
argon, other inert gases etc.

Troposphere

Troposphere is the lowermost layer of the atmosphere. It extends from 8-10
km at the poles and up to 16km at the equatorial region. So, it is extended up
to 16 km from the earth surface. It contains oxygen, Nitrogen, Carbon
dioxide, water vapour and dust particles. It is believed that about 95% of the
total mass of the atmosphere is present in this layer. The uppermost layer of
troposphere is called tropopause. Temperature of this layer decreases by 6.5°
C per km with rise of altitude from the earth’s surface. This layer is highly
affected by human activities. Troposphere is also called changeable layer
because temperature, humidity speed and direction of wind are continuously
going on changing within this layer.

264


Stratosphere

Stratosphere extends from 16km to 50km above the troposphere. It consists of
gases like Nitrogen, Oxygen, Ozone etc. it has a layer of ozone. The ozone
layer absorbs most of the harmful UV rays of the sun. So, this ozone layer
protects all the living beings from harmful rays. The upper boundary of this
layer is stratopause. The temperature increases with increase in altitude in this
region.

Mesosphere

Mesosphere extends from 50km to 80km above the stratosphere. It is the
coldest layer. The temperature decreases with the increase in altitude. It is the
coldest layer with the temperature about -109°C. Strong wind blows from
west to east in winter but east to west in rainy season.

Thermosphere

Thermosphere extends from 80 to 720km above the mesosphere. The density
of this layer is very low. It has great effect of solar radiation, So, temperature
increases with the rise of altitude, It contains the ions of various gases like
Nitrogen and oxygen. So, it is also called ionosphere

Exosphere

Exosphere is the outermost layer and extends above 720km from the earth’s
surface. It has low density of air. The temperature of this layer is above
1500°C. This layer is also called the fringe layer. It has low effect of earth’s
gravitation. So, the air molecules freely move towards the space.

Ozone layer

Ozone layer is present in the stratosphere. It consists of three atoms of
oxygen, When the ultraviolet rays breakdown the oxygen molecules, nascent
oxygen is formed which combines with normal oxygen molecule to form
ozone.

QO) ws 0+0

Q..0 ——+ 0;

Ozone layer extends from 25km to 40km from the earth surface. It absorbs
about 99% of ultraviolet rays and prevents them from entering into earth
surface. . It protects us from the diseases like blindness, skin cancer ete.
caused due to harmful rays. It helps to maintain suitable temperature of the
earth. It also preserves the ecosystem in the earth, Hence, it acts as a
protective layer for all of us and is called a protective layer.

265


Ozone formation also takes in the troposphere above the height of 12 km but
the amount of ozone in the troposphere is very low.

Depletion of Ozone layer

Depletion of ozone layer means the formation of hole in it or gradual thinning
of this layer. Depletion of ozone layer is caused due to the entry of chemicals
like chlorofluorocarbons, methyl chloroform, carbontetrachloride etc. into the
atmosphere. Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) are the major chemicals that deplete
the ozone layer. CFCs were discovered by T. Midgley in 1928 A.D. These
are the non toxic, non inflammable and cheap chemicals used as refrigerant.
When CFCs are reached into the atmosphere they deplete the ozone layer. UV
rays dissociate CFCs and form nascent chlorine. The nascent chlorine reacts
with ozone layer and gradually destroys this layer. The ozone hole was
observed above the Antarctica in 1885 A.D. for the first time.

Reaction
uy rays,
CFCl,———> CFC + Cl

uv rays
Cl+0; ——> Clo +0,
uy rays
2clo. ———* 21+ 0;
uy rays
CHCFCl ———* CFC, (again)
Effects of depletion of ozone layer

1. Due to the depletion of ozone layer, harmful ultraviolet rays reach to the
earth. These rays may cause eye cataract, skin burning, skin cancer, etc to
the human beings. These rays may reduce the immunity power of body
and disturb the reproductive functions of the animals.

2, The ultraviolet rays are really the hindrance factors for the growth of
plants. They disturb the photosynthesis process and also reduce crop
production.

3. Depletion of ozone layer leads to the entrance of more solar radiations
into the earth surface which results global warming

266


4, Ultraviolet rays are changed into heat rays (infrared rays) after interacting
with the substances on earth causing global warming.

5. Depletion of ozone layer affects the components of an ecosystem. As a
result balanced ecosystem cannot be maintained.

Ways to protects ozone layer

i. Since chlorofluorocarbons are the main chemical that depletes ozone
layer, their use should be avoided.

ii, Alternatives sources of energy like solar energy, bio gas and
hydroelectricity should be used.

iii, We must reduce the excessive use of nitrogen fertilizers.
iv. We should encourage the use of hydro fluorocarbons instead of CFCs.
Industrial Gases

The various harmful gases like carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, Sulphur
dioxide, nitrogen oxide etc. which are produced by the industries are called
industrial gases. Industries also release dust particles, smoke and solid wastes.
All these things pollute the atmosphere. The pollution caused due to such
gases and wastes is called industrial pollution.

When these gases reach to the atmosphere and react with rain water, they
form respective acids. It is given below;

4NO; + 2H;0 +O; > 4HNO;
SO) + H:0 > H,SO3

280) +02» 2803
$0;+H;0 > H,S0,

Effects of industrial gases

 

1. When the gases like SO, SO3, NO? etc. react with rain water, they
forms acids. The acids rain corrodes monuments, buildings, temples,
bridges etc.

2. Industrial gases cause dizziness, headache, eye problem, chest pain, lung
cancer, bronchitis, asthma etc. to the human beings.

3. Carbon monoxide causes disturbance in the oxygen transport mechanism
of blood circulation.

4. Oxides of nitrogen also deplete the ozone layer as,
NO + 0; — NO?+ O2

267


5.

2NO) + O3 + N205 + 202

Accumulation of large amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
causes global warming.

Summary

lL.

Climate change refers to the change of global or regional climate
over a long period of time.

The major effect of climate change is increasing rate of diseases
and mortality.

Different national efforts made to minimize the effects of climate
change are, National Communication Report, Climate Change
Policy (2067); National Adaption Programme ete.

Different international efforts made to minimize the effects of climate
change are Agenda 21, Kyoto Protocol and minimizing the production of
green house gases.

The thick layer of gases around the earth is called atmosphere.
Atmosphere consists five layers. They are troposphere, stratosphere,
mesosphere, thermosphere and exosphere.

A layer of ozone is found in the stratosphere. So it is called Ozonosphere.

Ozonosphere prevents the entrance of harmful UV radiations into the
earth surface, so this layer is also called a protection layer.

Ozone layer is mainly destroyed by chlorofluorocarbons. Others
chemicals are methyl chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, methyl
bromide, nitrogen dioxide etc.

Depletion of ozone layer causes entrance of UV rays into the earth. It

results the greater impact on human health and it also disturbs the growth
of plants, crop production and affect other aquatic and terrestrial life.

. The gases that are release from the industries like CO2, CO, SO2, NO2

etc. are called industrial gases.

268


od

 

Choose the best alternatives.

Which is the outermost layer of atmosphere?

a) Troposphere b) Exosphere

c) Thermosphere d) Stratosphere

Whaat is the maximum thickness of troposphere?
a) 16 Km b) 30 Km

c) 25 Km d)20Km

What is the main chemical that depletes ozone layer?

a) Chlorofluorocarbons _b) Carbon dioxide

c) Ammonia d) None of above

Which layer of the atmosphere is known as a protective layer?
a) Ozonosphere b) Troposphere

c) Mesosphere d) None of above

Answers the following questions.

1) List any three efforts made by the government of Nepal to
minimize the impacts of climate change. Explain in brief.

2) What is atmosphere? Name the different layers of atmosphere.

3) What is meant by ozone layer depletion? Mention any three effects
of it.

4) How do chlorofluorocarbons deplete ozone layer? Explain with
reaction.

5) What are industrial gases? How do they pollute environment?

6) Write any three effects of industrial pollution,

7) Write any two differences between troposphere and stratosphere.
8) What is acid rain?

269


Project Work

Find the activities done by the local people of your area to minimize the
impacts of climate change. Prepare a report on the basis of your findings and
discuss it with your friends in the classroom.

Glossary

Cataract: eye disease (Motiabindu)

Chloroform: an anesthetic chemical (CHCl) that also depletes ozone
layer

Ozone: a molecule formed by three oxygen atoms (03)

Ozonosphere: layer of ozone (O3)

Tropopause: upper boundary of troposphere

270


unit23 The Earth in the Universe

The vast and unlimited space containing all the mass and energy that exist is
called universe. The universe includes everything that exist, the most distant
stars, planets, satellites, as well as our earth and all the objects on it. Nobody
knows how big the universe is or whether it has any limits. The sun which
sustains all the life on our planet is only one of the billions and billions of
stars that exist in the universe, whereas the planet earth on which we live is
only a tiny speck in this vast space universe. The earth is one of the eight
planets, all of which revolve around a central star called sun. The billions of
star which exist in the universe are not distributed uniformly in space. These
star occurs in the form of clusters (or groups) of billions of stars called
galaxies.

 

In this chapter, we study in details about solar system, planets, satellites,
meters, comets, etc.

Solar system

The celestial bodies including planets, satellites, comets, etc. which revolve
around the sun form the solar system. It consists of eight planets, their
satellites (or moons), thousands of small heavenly bodies like meteors,
meteorites, plasma, asteroids, comets, charged particles and dust particles
The every members
of the solar family
revolves around the
main mass of solar
system, the sun, in a
same direction in
their own orbit due to
gravitational

attraction between the
sun and other bodies.
Solar system lies
about 3x10‘ light
year away from the
centre of Milky Way

galaxy. Fig, 23.1 Solar System

2

  


The Sun

The Sun is a medium-sized star found at the center of solar system. It has the
largest members of solar family, The mass of sun is around 770 times greater
than the sum of masses of every other members of solar family. The sun
produces huge amount of heat energy due to the nuclear reactions occurred in
its core. It is the main sources of energy for solar system. It emits different
useful as well as harmful rays such as visible light ray, infra-red, ultraviolet,
x-ray, radio waves, etc. in the form of solar energy. But the harmful rays are
absorbed before they reach on the earth’s surface and does not cause any
sever harm.

Sun also blows solar wind of charged particles all around at very high speed
(500km/s) carrying adequate amount of heat and electro static energy.

The sun consists of abundant amount of hydrogen gases. The nuclear reaction
which converts the hydrogen nuclei into Helium nuclei in its core is
responsible for the production of large amount of solar energy.

Planets

Planets are named after "wanderer"as they keep on moving and their position
among the stars in sky keeps on changing every day. The massive heavenly
body that rounds the sun in an elliptical orbit is called planet. Planets do not
produce light, but reflect the light of their parents star. In our solar system,
there are eight planets, They are: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter,
Saturn, Uranus and Neptune. On the basis of their position, the planets are
divided two different groups. They are: inner planets and outer planets.

Those planets which lie inside the asteroid belt i.e. Mercury, Venus, Earth and
Mars are inner planets. These planets are also known as terrestrial planets.
Those planets which lie outside the asteroid belt i.e. Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus
and Neptune are outer planets.

The rocky particle lies in the space between the orbit of mars and Jupiter is
called asteroid belt. All planets except Mercury and Venus con
satellites. The heavenly body that revolves around a planet is

  

 

Planets revolve the sun. They receive heat and light from sun. They have their
own velocity, duration to complete a revolution and rotation, different number
of satellites, surface temperature, atmosphere etc. A short description about
each of the eight planets is given below.

272


i)

ii)

iii)

iv)

Mercury (Budha)

It is the smallest, nearest and the fastest revolving planet from sun. It is
hardly seen by naked eyes from earth. It can only be seen at the horizon
just before sunrise or after sunset. It does not consist any satellites and
atmosphere. It is 5.8 x 10’ Km far from sun and 9.15 x 10’ Km far from
earth, Its diameter is 4851 Km. It is too hot at day (427° C) and too cold
at night (-170° C). Its rotation period is 59 days and revolution period is
88 days of earth. On observing it through earth, it seems like different
phases of moon.

Venus (Sukra)

It is the brightest, hottest and closest planet to the earth. It is also known
as twin planet of earth as it has approximately same size and mass. In the
early morning, it is visible in the eastern sky and visible in the western
sky in the evening, so termed as “morning and evening star”. It is 1.07
10° km far from the sun and approximately 4.2x 10’ km far from the
earth, Its diameter is 12035 km. Its rotation period is 243 days and
revolution period is 225 days. It doesn’t consist any satellites. It has
atmosphere of dense CO2, water vapor and clouds of H2SOy. This thick
atmosphere traps the solar radiation and the temperature rises to as high
as 480°C.

Earth (Pri

 

i
i)

Earth is the only planet known where life exists. It is the third planet on
the basis of distance from the sun and fifth largest planet in the solar
system. The average surface temperature of the earth is 15° C. Earth
consists of 71% of water and 29% of land. It is 1.5 x 10°km far from sun
(1 AU). Its rotation period is 24hrs and revolution period is 365days 6hrs
(reasons for leap year). It consist of one natural satellite called moon. Its
atmosphere consists of Nz (78%), O (21%), CO2, HzO vapour, methane
etc.

Mars (Mangal)

Mars is the planet which is fourth in position from the sun. Due to the
presence of limonite (iron ore), it is red in color. So, called red planet and
can be seen easily from the earth. Its diameter is 6,742 km which is
approximately half the diameter of earth. It is about 2.3 x 10°km far from
sun and 7.8 x 10’ km far from earth. Its temperature during the day varies
like that of the earth but during the night it may fall below -38° C. Its
rotation period is 24hr 37 min and revolution period is 687 days. It

273


vy)

vi)

vii)

consists of two satellites (Phobos and Diemos) and two polar caps at its
two poles made up of snow.

Big craters and volcanoes have dominated a region. One third of the mars
is occupied by the dark patches. Despite the lack of water on the planet it
is called ‘Seas of Mars’. Its atmosphere consists of Co, H2O, Oz, ete.
Jupiter (Brihaspati)

Jupiter is the largest planet of the solar system. It is around 319 times
bigger than the earth. Its average surface temperature is -143°C. Its
rotation period is 10 hr and revolution period is about 12 years. It is a
planet with maximum number of satellites i.e. 67. Its atmosphere consists
of Hz and He. It is always surrounded by dense clouds of methane and
ammonia so its surface is not seen clearly. It has a red spot in its
atmosphere which is assumed to be formed due to atmospheric hurricane.

Saturn (Sani)

Saturn is the second largest planet after Jupiter, It is surrounded by three
elliptical rings separated by dark gaps. The ring consists of many
individual pieces of mixture of ice and dust particles that travel around
the planet. This planet is second fastest than Jupiter for rotating about its
own axis. Its rotation period is 10 hr 30 min and revolution period is
29.5yrs. Its axis subtends an angle of 27° against its orbital plane. So, the
days and night are not equal at all places. It consists of 62 satellites
except particles in ring. Titan is the largest of them having 5,140 km
diameter. It is 1.5 x 10” km far from sun and 1.27 x 10° km far from the
earth. Its surface average temperature is -180° C and its atmosphere
consists of Hy and He.

Uranus (Arun)

Uranus was the planet discovered first. It is a giant ball of gas and liquid.
Its atmosphere consists of blue green clouds of methane, helium and
hydrogen. As like other planets, it is not solid. It is believed that water
lies beneath the level of ammonia and a rocky core is present in its
centre. It is 2.87x 10° km far from the sun and 2.73x 10° km far from the
earth. Its diameter is 50442 km and average surface temperature is -
216°C. Its rotation period is 17 hours 8 minutes and revolution period is
84 years. It consists of 27 satellites.

viii) Neptune (Barun)

Neptune is the farthest planet from the sun. Its surface consists of Hz, He,
Ne, silicate and water but its surface is not hard as the earth. This planet

274


contains a stony core and remaining most of the part is composed of
liquid and gases. This planet has a great dark spot as large as the earth is
seen. It is 4.48x10°km far from sun and 4.36x10° km from the earth. Its
surface average temperature is -220°C. Its rotation period is 16 hours and
revolution period is 164 years. It consists of 14 satellites. Triton is the
largest satellite among them having diameter approximately 2705 km.

[Note: Initially, Pluto was considered as a planet. But, it is removed from
the list of planet and now, known as dwarf planet as it is small, its orbit
coincide the orbit of Neptune and its orbit doesn’t lie on the same plane
of orbit of other planets]

Comets

The gaseous mass that revolves around the sun in highly elliptical path is
comet. It is made up of frozen gas, dust and ice. It is the tail or broom shaped
member of the solar system. They do not have their own light. They revolve
around the sun and have a very long period of revolution. A typical comets
consists of three main parts; the nucleus, the coma and the tail. The nucleus
consists of crumbly rock particles trapped inside a frozen matters. Along with
the dust particles, the evaporating layers form a hazy cloud called the coma.
Coma is surrounded by clouds of hydrogen gas.

The comets sometimes come very closer to the sun and moves far away from
the sun for the most time. When it comes closer to the sun, the ice and
gaseous particles get evaporated. The evaporated parts moved in opposite
direction to the sun due to solar wind, so it seems like a tail.

  

Most of the comets can be
seen through a telescope.
When they approach the
sun, they can be seen with
naked eyes due to their
long tails. They are seen in
the eastern sky before sun
rise or in western sky after

sunset after the lapse of

some years. After some

days, they go further away
and gradually disapper. Fig. 23.2 Comets

The comet is not a star in reality as it revolves around the sun and it is made
up of dust particles and ice cloud.

275


Name of comets First observed Revolution period

(in years)
Halley’s comet 240BC 16
Temple-tutle 1366AD 33

Enke 1786AD 33
Schwasman-Washman 1927AD 15

Bennet 1969AD -
Shoemaker Levi 1993AD —_Collided with Jupiter and

Collapsed in 1994 AD
Meteors and meteorites

‘A meteor is a bright streak of light seen for a short duration in the sky on a
clear night. So, it is also called shooting star or falling star because it looks
like a star falling from one direction to the other in the sky. Very big and
bright meteor is also called fire ball

When a small celestial body falls rolling into gravitational field of the earth, it
is rapidly attracted towards the earth . Then there is friction between the body
and the atmosphere. The body gets heated due to the heat produced during
friction and then it starts glowing brightly and changes into gas and vapour.
As a result, it disappears on the way. It is called meteor shower. Some
meteors are little larger and do not burn completely as they travel through the
atmosphere and reach the surface of the planets or moon due to gravity. These
are called meteorites.

On the basic of nature of particles present in the meteorites, they are mainly of
three different types. They are stony, irony and stony iron. Those meteorites
which consists of more amount of slica and less amount of iron is stony
meteorites. Those meteorites which consists of more amount of iron and less
amount of silica is irony meteorites. While, those meteoroids which consist of
equal amount of silica and iron is stony iron meteorites. The meteorites land
on the surface of earth with high velocity and thus make fissures or holes
called craters. Normally, meteorites found on earth are of irony in nature.
They are of 100 gm to 20,000 kg. Meteorites help scientists to conduct many
investigations and studies on the nature of materials from which the solar
system was formed and many more.

 

About 50,000 years ago, a meteorite fell in Arizona of USA and a deep crater
was formed which is shown in alongside figure. The diameter of crater was
1265m and 175m deep. This can be seen nowadays too.

276


 

Fig.23.3 (a) Meteor Fig. 23.3 (b) Meteorite

The largest meteorite was fallen on the earth in 1920 AD in Namibia. It is
named as Hoba which is 60 metric tons. It is believed that about 250 million
visible meteors enter the earth’s atmosphere every day with the velocities
35km/s to 95km/s. About 500 meteorites hit the surface of the earth in a year.

 

Constellation

Constellations are groups of some stars, which do not change their location
relative to each other and always form a fixed pattern, There are 88
constellations known and out of them 12 constellations are used as a sign of
zodiac. The ancient human societies gave names to the constellations seen
from northern hemisphere resembling their shapes to the Greece god ,
animals, equipments etc. For example, Ursa major and Ursa minor, orion, Leo
and lion etc. Similarly, in the period of 1400 to 1700 AD, the researcher gave
names to the constellations seen towards southern hemisphere whose shape
like animals. For example, telescopiam , muska (from moth) etc.The position
of the pole star (Dhurba Tara) can be located with the help of Ursa major. All
constellations appear to revolve around the pole star which remains stationary.
This is because it is directly above North pole on the axis of rotation of the
earth.

Ursa Major (Saptarishi)

Ursa major is a common and_ easily
recognizable or detectable constellation. In
Latin language, Ursa means women. The shape
of the Ursa major is like a bear. According to
hindu ethic, it has seven stars, so it is also
called Saptarishi. It is the third largest
constellation which is visible on Baisakh and
Jestha in the northern hemisphere.

 

Fig, 23.4 Ursa Major

277


Ursa minor

Ursa minor is also known as little bear or laghu
ptarishi . It also has seven bright stars. The
shape of ursa minor is also like of ursa major.
At the end of Ursa Minor, there is polar star
(dhurba tara). In the months of Ashad and
Shrawan, Ursa minor can be seen in the

northern sky. Fig, 23.5 Ursa Minor

   

Orion

In this constellation, there are seven
stars. It looks like a hunter. It can be
seen in the sky during the months
Poush and Magh.

 

Fig, 23.6 Orion

Some superstitions regarding to zodiacs

Many people in world have some beliefs regarding the relation of their fate
with their own zodiac. Also in Hinduism it is determined by the position of
moon in sky against certain zodiac and its certain region (Nakshatra) during
their birth time. As the earth revolves around the sun, the sun traces a certain
path through the sky known as ecliptic. This path has 13 groups of stars,
among which 12 are considered by astrology as zodiac constellations. Zodiacs
are 12 out of 13 groups of constellations that have astrological significance.
These zodiac constellations are:

a. Aries g) Libra
b. Taurus h) Scorpius (Scorpio in astrology)

c. Gemini i) Sagittarius

d. Cancer j) Capricormus (Capricom in astrology)
e. Leo k) Aquarius

f. Virgo ) Pisces

278


TF, ©

Capricorn Aquarius Pisces

—
=
2
ao

 

Aries Taurus Gemini
cy \
“GZ
aa
=
e
e
Cancer Leo Virgo
aN
|

 

As
CH gait?

cs C

Libra Scorpius Sagittarius

 

Fig. 23.7 Zodiacs

Modern science has not proved any such relation between fate and their birth
time. Here are some examples of blind beliefs about constellations are given
below:

279


There are millions of people in the world but constellations are only 88,
therefore there is no any scientific reason to determine the fate and future
of individuals with their own zodiac which is itself a common zodiac for
hundreds of thousands of people at the same time.

* Ifa groom has been born on new moon day, he is often called ‘Aunsia’ in
many rural communities, and bride for him is also chosen to be ‘Aunsia’
among many other alternatives, Otherwise, they think the life of those
couple wouldn’t go smoothly. It also has no scientific reason behind.

© It is believed in many society that the attitude of a person will be
accordingly the nature of their zodiac, but attitude is related with genetics
to some extent and mainly upon his/her environment during childhood,
schooling, profession of their parents, and the type of food they take, etc.

© Many of us select particular day for travelling and initiating some
important tasks not on the basis of their leisure, condition of weather,
economical situation and socio-political situation of the nation but on the
position of moon on certain zodiac and certain region around the bright
star (nakshatra) of the zodiac. It is also superstition.

* Many people prefer certain gems to put on accordingly as their zoidiac or
astrologist prescription, but there is no scientific reason behind it.

© In most of the arrange marriage, tallying of bride and groom’s zodiac in
practice and in many cases ignoring other important socio- economic and
educational, genetic aspects.

These are only some examples that resemble how deeply we have anchored
such unscientific norms and values. It is difficult and time consuming task to
make the society free of such superstition. Educating people is the only way
to get rid of it.

Importance of zodiacs

Familiar people can easily guess time and direction they want to know by
observing the position of zodiacs and other constellations in the sky. If
scattered stars of sky weren’t groups in different constellations, it would be
very difficult and mysterious to recognize them. Position of known stars and
constellation can be used to know observer’s actual position over water, air,
deserts and lonely places. Navigators, pilots, travelers, meteorologists use to
observe zodiacs and constellation regularly.

 

280


Galaxy

There are billions of stars in this universe but are not distributed uniformly in
space. These stars occur in huge bunches or clusters, each cluster contain
billions of stars. Such a big cluster of star is called a galaxy. Thus a galaxy is a
vast collection of billions of stars, hydrogen gas and dust clouds (nebulae)
isolated in space from similar systems. A typical large galaxy is 100000 light
years in diameter and contains hundred billion stars. There are about 100 billion
galaxies in the universe. So the total number of stars in the universe is 10” stars.

 

 

Astronomers have discovered at least one billion galaxies in the known part of
the universe. Two galaxies, the large Magellanic cloud and small Magellanic
cloud, are the closest neighbours to the earth’s galaxy, which is the milky way
galaxy. The one more important galaxy in the universe is Andromeda galaxy

On the ba
elliptical.

is of their shape, galaxies can be classified into irregular, spiral and

  

1. Irregular Galaxy

Irregular galaxy has no particular shape.
Irregular galaxies tend to be smaller and fainter
than other types of galaxies. Some astronomers
think that the irregular shapes of these galaxies
might have been caused by gigantic explosions
at their centres. Thus, the stars forming an
irregular galaxy are unevenly distributed in the galaxy.

 

Fig, 23.8

2. Spiral Galaxy

  
 
   

Spiral galaxy has a nucleus (Centre) of bright
stars and flattered arms that spiral around the
nucleus. The spiral arms contain millions of
stars. The milky way galaxy is the example of
spiral galaxy.

 

Elliptical Galaxy

This type of galaxies vary in shape from
nearly spherical to flattened disks. These
galaxies are called elliptical galaxies.
They are very bright in the centre and do
not have spiral arms. Elliptical galaxies
contain very little dust and gas and are
generally older than the other types of galaxies.

Fig, 23.10

281


Milkyway Galaxy (Akash Ganga)

The milky way is a spiral galaxy that contains our
solar system. The main body of a galaxy is a dise-
like shape. Its central part is thicker and its edge
is thinner. It is estimated that there might be 10'!
stars in milky way galaxy and its total mass is
about 1.33x10"' times more than that of the sun. Fig, 23.11

Satellites

Satellites are the heavenly bodies that revolve around the planet in their own
orbit. The speed of a satellite around the planet is called orbital velocity which
depends directly to the mass of the planet and inversely to the distance from
the planet. As like the planets, they don’t have their own light. They reflect
the light rays coming from sun. There are 153 natural satellites in number.

Satellites are of two different types- Natural satellites and artificial satellites.

Those satellites which are found naturally revolving around the planet are
natural satellites, whereas man-made satellites kept at a geo-stationary orbit of
the space that revolve around the planets are artificial satellites. The moon is
the only natural satellite of the Earth. The mean distance between the earth
and the moon is 384,400 km. Moon’s surface area is 3.79*10’ km’. It has a
diameter of about 3476 km. The moon takes about 27.33 days to complete a
revolution around the earth which is called sidereal month. However, the time
from one full moon to the next is about 29.5 days which is called synodic
month.

All the planets except Mercury and Venus have natural satellites. There are
altogether 173 satellites of planets. The following table presents the number
of satellites of different planets:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Planets Number of satellites

Mercury 0
Venus 0
Earth 1 (Moon)
Mars 2( Phobos, Deimos)
Jupiter 67 (Europa, IO, Callisto etc)
Saturn 62 (Titan)
Uranus 27 ( Miranda, Ariel etc)
Neptune 14 (Triton, Nereid etc)

 

 

 

 

282


Artificial satellite

The man made objects revolving round the
earth are called artificial satellites. The
artificial satellites are kept at a geo
stationary orbit at a height of 36,900 km
from the earth’s surface. They are sent with
the help of rockets to revolve round the
earth continuously. Solar cells are used in
artificial satellites to get energy. These are
controlled from the earth. The purposes of
launching artificial satellites are mentioned

 

below: AG, 28:12

a. To collect more and reliable information about solar system, stars,
nebulas and galaxies.

b. To conduct various scientific experiments which can’t be done on the
earth

c. To forecast weather.

d. To investigate different military and spying operations of enemies.

e. To research the life in outer space.

f. To establish space-laboratory and to make spaceship in future.

Summary

1. Solar system includes the sun and the heavenly bodies like planets,
satellites, comets, asteroids, meteoroids and interstellar dust and gases.
Most of them revolve round the sun.

2. The largest and heaviest mass of the solar system is the sun itself. Its
mass is approximately 1.99x10* kg.

3. Mercury, Venus, Earth and mars are inner planets whereas Jupiter,
Saturn, Uranus and Neptune are outer planets. The asteroid belt between
the orbits of Mars and Jupiter separates inner and outer planets.

4, Inner planets are called terrestrial planets as they have solid crust, Outer
planets lack solid crust; they are just gas-giants.

5. Small heavenly bodies made of dust and frozen gases that revolve round

the sun in the highly elliptical orbits are called comets. They appear as

283


“stars with tail” or a broom when approach to sun. A typical comet has
three parts: nucleus, coma and tail.

Sometimes in the clear night sky we see streak of light travelling with
very high speed in any direction for a very short period of time. They are
meteors, often called ‘falling stars’ or ‘shooting stars”

Small group of stars having fixed patterns resembling ancient gods,
goddess, animals or any scientific equipments are called constellations.
Till now, 88 such constellations are identified and given name by
astronomists.

Collection of millions of stars at a very vast region in space is called
galaxy. Galaxies are thousands of light years in dimensions and it is
believed that there are 10'? galaxies in the universe.

On the basis of shape, galaxies are categorized into spiral, elliptical and
irregular types.

10. Our solar system is situated at a distance of 30,000 light years from the

centre of Milky Way galaxy. It is a spiral type of galaxy having a disc
like shape with almost eight spiral arms radiating from the centre. This
galaxy has interstellar dust and gas particles in between the gap of two
stars. There are about 10" stars in this galaxy.

. Heavenly bodies that revolve round the planets are called satellites.
Satellites are categorized as natural and artificial. There are altogether
174 natural satellites in the solar system.

12. Artificial satellites are launched for various scientific purposes.

1.

 

5

choose the best alternatives.
How far is solar system from the milky way galaxy?

a. 20 thousand light year .30 thousand light year
c. 40 thousand light year .50 thousand light year
What is the mass of the sun?
a.1.99x10%kg b. 1.99x10%kg
€.1.99x10kg d. 1.99x10%kg

284


3. Which group of planets are kept under outer planets among the following
planets?

a. Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars
b. Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune
c. Earth, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn
d. Venus, Earth, Uranus, Neptune
4. The planet having the greatest number of moon is
a. Neptune b. Jupiter c. Saturn ~—d. Uranus
5. Which planet is the last member of inner planets ?
a. Mars. b. Earth c. Mercury — d. Neptune
6. How many constellations are identified yet?
a. 76 b. 88 c.9 d.12
7. What is the next name given to ursa major?
a. Saptarishi b. Laghu saptarishi c. Virgo. Taurus
B. Answer the following questions.
1, What is solar system? What are included in a solar family?
2. Write briefly about the sun.
3. Write two main features of each of eight planets.
4. Name:
The nearest planet to the sun

The brightest planet

 

The biggest planet
iv. Red planet

v. The living planet

vi. The hottest planet
vii. The planet with rings

5. What are comets? Why is a tail seen in each of them when
they approach the sun?

6. Why are meteors called shooting stars?

8. Define constellation. Mention its importance.

285


9.

10.
ll.

12.

What is meant by orion?
Mention the myths about the zodiac which still exists in our society.

What are the different types of galaxies? What type of galaxy is
milkyway galaxy?

What are artificial satellites? What are the purposes of launching
them?

Differentiate between

1.

ay PF eb

galaxy and constellation
planets and the sun

ursa major and ursa minor

jupiter and Saturn

natural Satellite and artificial satellite

meteor and meteorite

Explain with reason:

1.

2.
3.
4.

Mercury is the nearest planet to the sun but venus is hotter than it.
Mars is called a red planet.
The tail of the comet can be seen when it comes closer to the sun.

A meteor doesn’t reach the surface of the earth.

Project Work

Make a model of solar system using different sized spherical objects.

286


